CHAPTER I

"Well, Prince, so enoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
Antichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothin more
to do with you and you are no loner my friend, no loner my 'faithful
slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frihtened
you--sit down and tell me all the news."

It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
these words she reeted Prince Vasili Kurain, a man of hih rank and
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna
had had a couh for some days. She was, as she said, sufferin from la
rippe; rippe bein then a new word in St. Petersbur, used only by the
elite.

All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered
by a scarlet-liveried footman that mornin, ran as follows:

"If you have nothin better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the
prospect of spendin an evenin with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
I shall be very charmed to see you toniht between 7 and 10--Annette
Scherer."

"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the least
disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearin an
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
refined French in which our randfathers not only spoke but thouht, and
with the entle, patronizin intonation natural to a man of importance
who had rown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,
kissed her hand, presentin to her his bald, scented, and shinin head,
and complacently seated himself on the sofa.

"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind
at rest," said he without alterin his tone, beneath the politeness and
affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be
discerned.

"Can one be well while sufferin morally? Can one be calm in times like
these if one has any feelin?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are stayin the
whole evenin, I hope?"

"And the fete at the Enlish ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must
put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My dauhter is comin for
me to take me there."

"I thouht today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these
festivities and fireworks are becomin wearisome."

"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been
put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
said thins he did not even wish to be believed.

"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's
dispatch? You know everythin."

"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless
tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."

Prince Vasili always spoke lanuidly, like an actor repeatin a stale
part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel
like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, thouh it
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charmin defect,
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
correct.

In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst
out:

"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand thins,
but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is
betrayin us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our racious soverein
reconizes his hih vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
thin I have faith in! Our ood and wonderful soverein has to perform
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that od will
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
this murderer and villain! We alone must avene the blood of the just
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... Enland with her commercial
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness
of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and
still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer did
Novosiltsev et? None. The Enlish have not understood and cannot
understand the self-abneation of our Emperor who wants nothin for
himself, but only desires the ood of mankind. And what have they
promised? Nothin! And what little they have promised they will not
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a word
that Hardenbur says, or Hauwitz either. This famous Prussian
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in od and the lofty
destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"

She suddenly paused, smilin at her own impetuosity.

"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent
instead of our dear Wintzinerode you would have captured the Kin of
Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you ive me a
cup of tea?"

"In a moment. A propos," she added, becomin calm aain, "I am expectin
two very interestin men toniht, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is
connected with the Montmorencys throuh the Rohans, one of the best
French families. He is one of the enuine emires, the ood ones. And
also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"

"I shall be delihted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he
added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
thouh the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his
visit, "is it true that the Dowaer Empress wants Baron Funke to be
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor
creature."

Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
tryin throuh the Dowaer Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the
baron.

Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor
anyone else had a riht to criticize what the Empress desired or was
pleased with.

"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowaer Empress by her sister,"
was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.

As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect minled with
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deined to show Baron Funke
beaucoup d'estime, and aain her face clouded over with sadness.

The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
both to rebuke him (for darin to speak as he had done of a man
recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
said:

"Now about your family. Do you know that since your dauhter came out
everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazinly
beautiful."

The prince bowed to sinify his respect and ratitude.

"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawin nearer to
the prince and smilin amiably at him as if to show that political and
social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
distributed. Why has fate iven you two such splendid children? I don't
speak of Anatole, your younest. I don't like him," she added in a tone
admittin of no rejoinder and raisin her eyebrows. "Two such charmin
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you
don't deserve to have them."

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the
bump of paternity."

"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am
dissatisfied with your youner son? Between ourselves" (and her face
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
and you were pitied...."

The prince answered nothin, but she looked at him sinificantly,
awaitin a reply. He frowned.

"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a
father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
is the only difference between them." He said this smilin in a way more
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
very clearly revealed somethin unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.

"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father
there would be nothin I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
lookin up pensively.

"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"

He said no more, but expressed his resination to cruel fate by a
esture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.

"Have you never thouht of marryin your prodial son Anatole?" she
asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmakin, and thouh I
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
Bolkonskaya."

Prince Vasili did not reply, thouh, with the quickness of memory and
perception befittin a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
the head that he was considerin this information.

"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad
current of his thouhts, "that Anatole is costin me forty thousand
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five
years, if he oes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"

"Her father is very rich and stiny. He lives in the country. He is the
well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the Kin of Prussia.' He is very clever
but eccentric, and a bore. The poor irl is very unhappy. She has a
brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an
aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here toniht."

"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly takin Anna Pavlovna's
hand and for some reason drawin it downwards. "Arrane that affair for
me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as a
villae elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of ood
family and that's all I want."

And with the familiarity and easy race peculiar to him, he raised the
maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swun it to and fro as
he lay back in his armchair, lookin in another direction.

"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflectin, "I'll speak to Lise, youn
Bolkonski's wife, this very evenin, and perhaps the thin can be
arraned. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
apprenticeship as old maid."




CHAPTER II

Anna Pavlovna's drawin room was radually fillin. The hihest
Petersbur society was assembled there: people differin widely in ae
and character but alike in the social circle to which they beloned.
Prince Vasili's dauhter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her father
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her bade
as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
femme la plus seduisante de Petersbour, * was also there. She had been
married durin the previous winter, and bein prenant did not o to any
lare atherins, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,
Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio
and many others had also come.


* The most fascinatin woman in Petersbur.

To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very ravely conducted him or her to a
little old lady, wearin lare bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
sailin in from another room as soon as the uests bean to arrive; and
slowly turnin her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
mentioned each one's name and then left them.

Each visitor performed the ceremony of reetin this old aunt whom not
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these reetins with mournful and
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
Majesty, "who, thank od, was better today." And each visitor, thouh
politeness prevented his showin impatience, left the old woman with a
sense of relief at havin performed a vexatious duty and did not return
to her the whole evenin.

The youn Princess Bolkonskaya had brouht some work in a old-
embroidered velvet ba. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicate
dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but it
lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charmin when she
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
with a thorouhly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of her
upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special and
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brihtened at the siht of this pretty
youn woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
carryin her burden so lihtly. Old men and dull dispirited youn ones
who looked at her, after bein in her company and talkin to her a
little while, felt as if they too were becomin, like her, full of life
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her briht smile
and the constant leam of her white teeth, thouht that they were in a
specially amiable mood that day.

The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swayin
steps, her workba on her arm, and aily spreadin out her dress sat
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doin was a
pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brouht my work,"
said she in French, displayin her ba and addressin all present.
"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
added, turnin to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite a
small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spread
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty ray dress,
irdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.

"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"
replied Anna Pavlovna.

"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
French, turnin to a eneral, "my husband is desertin me? He is oin
to et himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
added, addressin Prince Vasili, and without waitin for an answer she
turned to speak to his dauhter, the beautiful Helene.

"What a delihtful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to
Anna Pavlovna.

One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built youn man with
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the liht-colored breeches fashionable
at that time, a very hih ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
youn man was an illeitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known
randee of Catherine's time who now lay dyin in Moscow. The youn man
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna reeted him with the nod she
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawin room. But in spite of
this lowest-rade reetin, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the siht
of somethin too lare and unsuited to the place, came over her face
when she saw Pierre enter. Thouh he was certainly rather bier than
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to the
clever thouh shy, but observant and natural, expression which
distinuished him from everyone else in that drawin room.

"It is very ood of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanin an alarmed lance with her aunt
as she conducted him to her.

Pierre murmured somethin unintelliible, and continued to look round as
if in search of somethin. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.

Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
aunt without waitin to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna
Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe
Morio? He is a most interestin man."

"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
interestin but hardly feasible."

"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say somethin and et
away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed a
reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
finished speakin to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
wished to et away. With his head bent, and his bi feet spread apart,
he bean explainin his reasons for thinkin the abbe's plan chimerical.

"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.

And havin ot rid of this youn man who did not know how to behave, she
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
to help at any point where the conversation miht happen to fla. As the
foreman of a spinnin mill, when he has set the hands to work, oes
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her
drawin room, approachin now a silent, now a too-noisy roup, and by a
word or sliht rearranement kept the conversational machine in steady,
proper, and reular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
the roup round Mortemart to listen to what was bein said there, and
aain when he passed to another roup whose center was the abbe.

Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's
was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the
intellectual lihts of Petersbur were athered there and, like a child
in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missin any
clever conversation that was to be heard. Seein the self-confident and
refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expectin
to hear somethin very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here the
conversation seemed interestin and he stood waitin for an opportunity
to express his own views, as youn people are fond of doin.




CHAPTER III

Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swin. The spindles hummed
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
settled into three roups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the
abbe. Another, of youn people, was rouped round the beautiful Princess
Helene, Prince Vasili's dauhter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,
very pretty and rosy, thouh rather too plump for her ae. The third
roup was athered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.

The vicomte was a nice-lookin youn man with soft features and polished
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously servin him up as a
treat to her uests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially
choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the
kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her
uests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choice
morsels. The roup about Mortemart immediately bean discussin the
murder of the Duc d'Enhien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enhien had
perished by his own mananimity, and that there were particular reasons
for Buonaparte's hatred of him.

"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a
pleasant feelin that there was somethin a la Louis XV in the sound of
that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."

The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willinness to
comply. Anna Pavlovna arraned a roup round him, invitin everyone to
listen to his tale.

"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to one of
the uests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another.
"How evidently he belons to the best society," said she to a third; and
the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
advantaeous style, like a well-arnished joint of roast beef on a hot
dish.

The vicomte wished to bein his story and ave a subtle smile.

"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful
youn princess who was sittin some way off, the center of another
roup.

The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanin smile with which
she had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautiful
woman. With a sliht rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss and
ivy, with a leam of white shoulders, lossy hair, and sparklin
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not lookin
at any of them but smilin on all, as if raciously allowin each the
privilee of admirin her beautiful fiure and shapely shoulders, back,
and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much exposed--
and she seemed to brin the lamour of a ballroom with her as she moved
toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only did she not
show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared shy of
her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish,
but to be unable, to diminish its effect.

"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by somethin extraordinary
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
unchanin smile.

"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilinly
inclinin his head.

The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
a reply unnecessary. She smilinly waited. All the time the story was
bein told she sat upriht, lancin now at her beautiful round arm,
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
produced an effect she lanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just
the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and aain relapsed
into her radiant smile.

The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.

"Wait a moment, I'll et my work.... Now then, what are you thinkin
of?" she went on, turnin to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workba."

There was a eneral movement as the princess, smilin and talkin
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and aily arraned herself in her
seat.

"Now I am all riht," she said, and askin the vicomte to bein, she
took up her work.

Prince Hippolyte, havin brouht the workba, joined the circle and
movin a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.

Le charmant Hippolyte was surprisin by his extraordinary resemblance to
his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of this
resemblance he was exceedinly uly. His features were like his
sister's, but while in her case everythin was lit up by a joyous, self-
satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
wonderful classic beauty of her fiure, his face on the contrary was
dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-
confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth
all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied rimace, and his arms and
les always fell into unnatural positions.

"It's not oin to be a host story?" said he, sittin down beside the
princess and hastily adjustin his lornette, as if without this
instrument he could not bein to speak.

"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shruin his
shoulders.

"Because I hate host stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which
showed that he only understood the meanin of his words after he had
uttered them.

He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in a
dark-reen dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockins.

The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
to the effect that the Duc d'Enhien had one secretly to Paris to visit
Mademoiselle eore; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
happened to fall into one of the faintin fits to which he was subject,
and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and this
mananimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.

The story was very pretty and interestin, especially at the point where
the rivals suddenly reconized one another; and the ladies looked
aitated.

"Charmin!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquirin lance at the little
princess.

"Charmin!" whispered the little princess, stickin the needle into her
work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
prevented her from oin on with it.

The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smilin ratefully
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
watchful eye on the youn man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
talkin too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the
rescue. Pierre had manaed to start a conversation with the abbe about
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the youn
man's simple-minded eaerness, was explainin his pet theory. Both were
talkin and listenin too eaerly and too naturally, which was why Anna
Pavlovna disapproved.

"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rihts of the
people," the abbe was sayin. "It is only necessary for one powerful
nation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herself
disinterestedly at the head of an alliance havin for its object the
maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
world!"

"But how are you to et that balance?" Pierre was beinnin.

At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, lookin severely at Pierre,
asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's face
instantly chaned and assumed an offensively affected, suary
expression, evidently habitual to him when conversin with women.

"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
the honor of bein received, that I have not yet had time to think of
the climate," said he.

Not lettin the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more
conveniently to keep them under observation, brouht them into the
larer circle.




CHAPTER IV

Just then another visitor entered the drawin room: Prince Andrew
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome youn
man, of medium heiht, with firm, clearcut features. Everythin about
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
offered a most strikin contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawin room, but had
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
them. And amon all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed to
bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her
with a rimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna's
hand, and screwin up his eyes scanned the whole company.

"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.

"eneral Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speakin French and stressin the
last syllable of the eneral's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased
to take me as an aide-de-camp...."

"And Lise, your wife?"

"She will o to the country."

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charmin wife?"

"Andre," said his wife, addressin her husband in the same coquettish
manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been tellin us
such a tale about Mademoiselle eore and Buonaparte!"

Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from the
moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with lad,
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
Prince Andrew frowned aain, expressin his annoyance with whoever was
touchin his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beamin face he ave him an
unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.

"There now!... So you, too, are in the reat world?" said he to Pierre.

"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper with
you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte
who was continuin his story.

"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, lauhin and pressin Pierre's
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to
say somethin more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his dauhter
ot up to o and the two youn men rose to let them pass.

"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,
holdin him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his risin.
"This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,
and oblies me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your
enchantin party," said he, turnin to Anna Pavlovna.

His dauhter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lihtly
holdin up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre azed at her with rapturous,
almost frihtened, eyes as she passed him.

"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.

"Very," said Pierre.

In passin Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:
"Educate this bear for me! He has been stayin with me a whole month and
this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothin is so
necessary for a youn man as the society of clever women."

Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had
been sittin with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili
in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had
left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and
fear.

"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurryin after him into the
anteroom. "I can't remain any loner in Petersbur. Tell me what news I
may take back to my poor boy."

Althouh Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to the
elderly lady, even betrayin some impatience, she ave him an
inratiatin and appealin smile, and took his hand that he miht not o
away.

"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would
be transferred to the uards at once?" said she.

"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince
Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
you to appeal to Rumyantsev throuh Prince olitsyn. That would be the
best way."

The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonin to one of the
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and havin lon been out of
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
Petersbur to procure an appointment in the uards for her only son. It
was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an
invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listenin to the
vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frihtened her, an embittered
look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she
smiled aain and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tihtly.

"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for
anythin and I never will aain, nor have I ever reminded you of my
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for od's sake to do
this for my son--and I shall always reard you as a benefactor," she
added hurriedly. "No, don't be anry, but promise! I have asked olitsyn
and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,
tryin to smile thouh tears were in her eyes.

"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turnin her beautiful
head and lookin over her classically molded shoulder as she stood
waitin by the door.

Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized
if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and havin once realized that
if he asked on behalf of all who beed of him, he would soon be unable
to ask for himself, he became chary of usin his influence. But in
Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, somethin
like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;
he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those women--
mostly mothers--who, havin once made up their minds, will not rest
until they have ained their end, and are prepared if necessary to o on
insistin day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes.
This last consideration moved him.

"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,
I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the uards.
Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"

"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew your
kindness!" He turned to o.

"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the uards..." she
faltered. "You are on ood terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...
recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and
then..."

Prince Vasili smiled.

"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since
his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
Moscow ladies have conspired to ive him all their sons as adjutants."

"No, but do promise! I won't let you o! My dear benefactor..."

"Papa," said his beautiful dauhter in the same tone as before, "we
shall be late."

"Well, au revoir! ood-bye! You hear her?"

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"

"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."

"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,
with the smile of a coquettish irl, which at one time probably came
naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.

Apparently she had forotten her ae and by force of habit employed all
the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had one her face
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
roup where the vicomte was still talkin, and aain pretended to
listen, while waitin till it would be time to leave. Her task was
accomplished.




CHAPTER V

"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"
asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of enoa and Lucca
layin their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur
Buonaparte sittin on a throne and rantin the petitions of the
nations? Adorable! It is enouh to make one's head whirl! It is as if
the whole world had one crazy."

Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straiht in the face with a sarcastic
smile.

"'Dieu me la donne, are a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine
when he said that," he remarked, repeatin the words in Italian: "'Dio
mi l'ha dato. uai a chi la tocchi!'"


* od has iven it to me, let him who touches it beware!

"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the lass run
over," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereins will not be able to
endure this man who is a menace to everythin."

"The sovereins? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but
hopeless: "The sovereins, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothin!" and he became more
animated. "And believe me, they are reapin the reward of their betrayal
of the Bourbon cause. The sovereins! Why, they are sendin ambassadors
to compliment the usurper."

And sihin disdainfully, he aain chaned his position.

Prince Hippolyte, who had been azin at the vicomte for some time
throuh his lornette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
little princess, and havin asked for a needle bean tracin the Conde
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much ravity
as if she had asked him to do it.

"Baton de ueules, enrele de ueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.

The princess listened, smilin.

"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year loner," the
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which he
is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
follows the current of his own thouhts, "thins will have one too far.
By intriues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I mean
ood French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."

He shrued his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
who had him under observation, interrupted:

"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always
accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared
that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their
own form of overnment; and I believe that once free from the usurper,
the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its
rihtful kin," she concluded, tryin to be amiable to the royalist
emirant.

"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite
rihtly supposes that matters have already one too far. I think it will
be difficult to return to the old reime."

"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushin and breakin into the
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already one over to
Bonaparte's side."

"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without
lookin at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the real
state of French public opinion."

"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.

It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aimin his
remarks at him, thouh without lookin at him.

"'I showed them the path to lory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince
Andrew continued after a short silence, aain quotin Napoleon's words.
"'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far
he was justified in sayin so."

"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duc
even the most partial ceased to reard him as a hero. If to some
people," he went on, turnin to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
hero less on earth."

Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation
of the vicomte's epiram, Pierre aain broke into the conversation, and
thouh Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say somethin inappropriate, she
was unable to stop him.

"The execution of the Duc d'Enhien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed reatness
of soul by not fearin to take on himself the whole responsibility of
that deed."

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
reatness of soul?" said the little princess, smilin and drawin her
work nearer to her.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in Enlish, and bean slappin his knee
with the palm of his hand.

The vicomte merely shrued his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his
audience over his spectacles and continued.

"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled from
the Revolution leavin the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the eneral ood,
he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suested Anna Pavlovna.

But Pierre continued his speech without heedin her.

"No," cried he, becomin more and more eaer, "Napoleon is reat because
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
that was ood in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and
of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."

"Yes, if havin obtained power, without availin himself of it to commit
murder he had restored it to the rihtful kin, I should have called him
a reat man," remarked the vicomte.

"He could not do that. The people only ave him power that he miht rid
them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a reat man. The
Revolution was a rand thin!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betrayin by
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
wish to express all that was in his mind.

"What? Revolution and reicide a rand thin?... Well, after that... But
won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.

"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

"I am not speakin of reicide, I am speakin about ideas."

"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and reicide," aain interjected an
ironical voice.

"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.
What is important are the rihts of man, emancipation from prejudices,
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
in full force."

"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last
decidin seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
"hih-soundin words which have lon been discredited. Who does not love
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.
Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We
wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."

Prince Andrew kept lookin with an amused smile from Pierre to the
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrileious words had not
exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
a viorous attack on the orator.

"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact
of a reat man executin a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent
and untried?"

"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
all like the conduct of a reat man!"

"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the
little princess, shruin her shoulders.

"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

Pierre, not knowin whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, his
rave, even rather loomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another-
-a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to ask
foriveness.

The vicomte who was meetin him for the first time saw clearly that this
youn Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suested. All were
silent.

"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew.
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinuish between
his acts as a private person, as a eneral, and as an emperor. So it
seems to me."

"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this
reinforcement.

"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was
reat on the bride of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he
ave his hand to the plaue-stricken; but... but there are other acts
which it is difficult to justify."

Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sin to his wife that it was time to
o.

Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up makin sins to everyone to attend,
and askin them all to be seated bean:

"I was told a charmin Moscow story today and must treat you to it.
Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte bean to tell his story in such Russian
as a Frenchman would speak after spendin about a year in Russia.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eaerly did he demand their
attention to his story.

"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stiny. She must
have two footmen behind her carriae, and very bi ones. That was her
taste. And she had a lady's maid, also bi. She said..."

Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collectin his ideas with
difficulty.

"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'irl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,
et up behind the carriae, and come with me while I make some calls.'"

Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out lauhin lon before his
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
persons, amon them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however
smile.

"She went. Suddenly there was a reat wind. The irl lost her hat and
her lon hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no loner and
went on, between asps of lauhter: "And the whole world knew...."

And so the anecdote ended. Thouh it was unintelliible why he had told
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so areeably endin
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
conversation broke up into insinificant small talk about the last and
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
where.




CHAPTER VI

Havin thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charmin soiree, the uests bean
to take their leave.

Pierre was unainly. Stout, about the averae heiht, broad, with hue
red hands; he did not know, as the sayin is, how to enter a drawin
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say somethin
particularly areeable before oin away. Besides this he was absent-
minded. When he rose to o, he took up instead of his own, the eneral's
three-cornered hat, and held it, pullin at the plume, till the eneral
asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and inability to
enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by his kindly,
simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with
a Christian mildness that expressed foriveness of his indiscretion,
nodded and said: "I hope to see you aain, but I also hope you will
chane your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."

When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but aain everybody
saw his smile, which said nothin, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
opinions, but you see what a capital, ood-natured fellow I am." And
everyone, includin Anna Pavlovna, felt this.

Prince Andrew had one out into the hall, and, turnin his shoulders to
the footman who was helpin him on with his cloak, listened
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, prenant
princess, and stared fixedly at her throuh his eyelass.

"o in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,
takin leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
voice.

Anna Pavlovna had already manaed to speak to Lise about the match she
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.

"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write
to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"--
and she left the hall.

Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bendin his face
close to her, bean to whisper somethin.

Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holdin a shawl and a
cloak, waitin for the conversation to finish. They listened to the
French sentences which to them were meaninless, with an air of
understandin but not wishin to appear to do so. The princess as usual
spoke smilinly and listened with a lauh.

"I am very lad I did not o to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte
"-so dull-. It has been a delihtful evenin, has it not? Delihtful!"

"They say the ball will be very ood," replied the princess, drawin up
her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."

"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte
smilin joyfully; and snatchin the shawl from the footman, whom he even
pushed aside, he bean wrappin it round the princess. Either from
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a lon time, as
thouh embracin her.

Still smilin, she racefully moved away, turnin and lancin at her
husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
seem.

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, lookin past her.

Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
reached to his very heels, and, stumblin in it, ran out into the porch
followin the princess, whom a footman was helpin into the carriae.

"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumblin with his tonue as well as
with his feet.

The princess, pickin up her dress, was takin her seat in the dark
carriae, her husband was adjustin his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
pretense of helpin, was in everyone's way.

"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disareeable
tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blockin his path.

"I am expectin you, Pierre," said the same voice, but ently and
affectionately.

The postilion started, the carriae wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
lauhed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waitin for the vicomte
whom he had promised to take home.

"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, havin seated himself beside
Hippolyte in the carriae, "your little princess is very nice, very nice
indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his finers. Hippolyte
burst out lauhin.

"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who
ives himself the airs of a monarch."

Hippolyte spluttered aain, and amid his lauhter said, "And you were
sayin that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
know how to deal with them."

Pierre reachin the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like one
quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
Commentaries), and restin on his elbow, bean readin it in the middle.

"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said
Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbin his small white hands.

Pierre turned his whole body, makin the sofa creak. He lifted his eaer
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.

"That abbe is very interestin but he does not see the thin in the
riht liht.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do not
know how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."

It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
conversation.

"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you at
last decided on anythin? Are you oin to be a uardsman or a
diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.

Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his les tucked under him.

"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."

"But you must decide on somethin! Your father expects it."

Pierre at the ae of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, and
had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his
father dismissed the abbe and said to the youn man, "Now o to
Petersbur, look round, and choose your profession. I will aree to
anythin. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to
me all about it, and I will help you in everythin." Pierre had already
been choosin a career for three months, and had not decided on
anythin. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speakin.
Pierre rubbed his forehead.

"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referrin to the abbe whom he had
met that evenin.

"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew aain interrupted him, "let us
talk business. Have you been to the Horse uards?"

"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinkin and wanted to
tell you. There is a war now aainst Napoleon. If it were a war for
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
but to help Enland and Austria aainst the reatest man in the world is
not riht."

Prince Andrew only shrued his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,
but it would in fact have been difficult to ive any other answer than
the one Prince Andrew ave to this naive question.

"If no one fouht except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"
he said.

"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

"Well, why are you oin to the war?" asked Pierre.

"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am oin..." He paused.
"I am oin because the life I am leadin here does not suit me!"




CHAPTER VII

The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew
shook himself as if wakin up, and his face assumed the look it had had
in Anna Pavlovna's drawin room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.
The princess came in. She had chaned her own for a house dress as
fresh and eleant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
chair for her.

"How is it," she bean, as usual in French, settlin down briskly and
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never ot married? How
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for sayin so,
but you have no sense about women. What an arumentative fellow you are,
Monsieur Pierre!"

"And I am still aruin with your husband. I can't understand why he
wants to o to the war," replied Pierre, addressin the princess with
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by youn men in their
intercourse with youn women.

The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.

"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I
don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars. How is it
that we women don't want anythin of the kind, don't need it? Now you
shall jude between us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's aide-de-
camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so much
appreciated by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
askin, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed." She lauhed.
"He is so well received everywhere. He miht easily become aide-de-camp
to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most raciously.
Annette and I were speakin of how to arrane it. What do you think?"

Pierre looked at his friend and, noticin that he did not like the
conversation, ave no reply.

"When are you startin?" he asked.

"Oh, don't speak of his oin, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said
the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken
to Hippolyte in the drawin room and which was so plainly ill-suited to
the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when I
remembered that all these delihtful associations must be broken off...
and then you know, Andre..." (she looked sinificantly at her husband)
"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her
back.

Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
friid politeness.

"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.

"There, what eotists men all are: all, all eotists! Just for a whim of
his own, oodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone in
the country."

"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew ently.

"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to be
afraid."

Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, ivin her not a
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
felt it indecorous to speak of her prenancy before Pierre, thouh the
ist of the matter lay in that.

"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew
slowly, not takin his eyes off his wife.

The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a esture of despair.

"No, Andrew, I must say you have chaned. Oh, how you have..."

"Your doctor tells you to o to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You
had better o."

The princess said nothin, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
Prince Andrew rose, shrued his shoulders, and walked about the room.

Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and
now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but chaned his mind.

"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre bein here?" exclaimed the little
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
rimace. "I have lon wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have chaned so
to me? What have I done to you? You are oin to the war and have no
pity for me. Why is it?"

"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an
entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
reret her words. But she went on hurriedly:

"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave
like that six months ao?"

"Lise, I be you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.

Pierre, who had been rowin more and more aitated as he listened to
all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
siht of tears and was ready to cry himself.

"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you I
myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! An
outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself... ood-
bye!"

Prince Andrew cauht him by the hand.

"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the
pleasure of spendin the evenin with you."

"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without
restrainin her anry tears.

"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raisin his voice to the pitch which
indicates that patience is exhausted.

Suddenly the anry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty
face chaned into a winnin and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
lanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,
deprecatin expression of a do when it rapidly but feebly was its
droopin tail.

"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and liftin her dress with one hand
she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.

"ood niht, Lise," said he, risin and courteously kissin her hand as
he would have done to a straner.




CHAPTER VIII

The friends were silent. Neither cared to bein talkin. Pierre
continually lanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
with his small hand.

"Let us o and have supper," he said with a sih, oin to the door.

They entered the eleant, newly decorated, and luxurious dinin room.
Everythin from the table napkins to the silver, china, and lass bore
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
Halfway throuh supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
with a look of nervous aitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
his face, bean to talk--as one who has lon had somethin on his mind
and suddenly determines to speak out.

"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till
you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, and
until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her
plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
mistake. Marry when you are old and ood for nothin--or all that is
ood and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry
expectin anythin from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawin room,
where you will be raned side by side with a court lackey and an
idiot!... But what's the ood?..." and he waved his arm.

Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
the ood-natured expression still more apparent, and azed at his friend
in amazement.

"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O od, what would I not
ive now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I
mention this, because I like you."

As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who
had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had
uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face
was now quiverin with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire
of life had seemed extinuished, now flashed with brilliant liht. It
was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more
impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation.

"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the
whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he
(thouh Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
worked went step by step toward his oal. He was free, he had nothin
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with a
woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
have of hope and strenth merely weihs you down and torments you with
reret. Drawin rooms, ossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now oin to the war,
the reatest war there ever was, and I know nothin and am fit for
nothin. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set
without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew
what those society women are, and women in eneral! My father is riht.
Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everythin--that's what women are when
you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it
seems as if there were somethin in them, but there's nothin, nothin,
nothin! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince
Andrew.

"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider
yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everythin
before you, everythin. And you..."

He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how hihly he
thouht of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.

"How can he talk like that?" thouht Pierre. He considered his friend a
model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the hihest
deree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which miht be best
described as strenth of will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince
Andrew's calm manner of treatin everybody, his extraordinary memory,
his extensive readin (he had read everythin, knew everythin, and had
an opinion about everythin), but above all at his capacity for work and
study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity for
philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly
addicted), he rearded even this not as a defect but as a sin of
strenth.

Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
and commendation are essential, just as rease is necessary to wheels
that they may run smoothly.

"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talkin
about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smilin at
his reassurin thouhts.

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.

"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxin into
a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illeitimate son!" He suddenly
blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a reat effort to say
this. "Without a name and without means... And it really..." But he did
not say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am all
riht. Only I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted to
consult you seriously."

Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his lance--friendly and
affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.

"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man amon our
whole set. Yes, you're all riht! Choose what you will; it's all the
same. You'll be all riht anywhere. But look here: ive up visitin
those Kurains and leadin that sort of life. It suits you so badly--all
this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"

"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shruin his
shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"

"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kurains' set of women, 'women
and wine' I don't understand!"

Pierre was stayin at Prince Vasili Kurain's and sharin the dissipated
life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were plannin to reform by
marryin him to Prince Andrew's sister.

"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thouht,
"seriously, I have lon been thinkin of it.... Leadin such a life I
can't decide or think properly about anythin. One's head aches, and one
spends all one's money. He asked me for toniht, but I won't o."

"You ive me your word of honor not to o?"

"On my honor!"




CHAPTER IX

It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless,
northern, summer niht. Pierre took an open cab intendin to drive
straiht home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the
impossibility of oin to sleep on such a niht. It was liht enouh to
see a lon way in the deserted street and it seemed more like mornin or
evenin than niht. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kurain
was expectin the usual set for cards that evenin, after which there
was enerally a drinkin bout, finishin with visits of a kind Pierre
was very fond of.

"I should like to o to Kurain's," thouht he.

But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to o
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
that he decided to o. The thouht immediately occurred to him that his
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he ave it he
had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his atherin; "besides,"
thouht he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional thins with no
definite meanin, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may
be dead, or somethin so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and
dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often induled in reflections of
this sort, nullifyin all his decisions and intentions. He went to
Kurain's.

Reachin the lare house near the Horse uards' barracks, in which
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lihted porch, ascended the stairs,
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lyin about; there was a smell of
alcohol, and sounds of voices and shoutin in the distance.

Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
remains of supper. A footman, thinkin no one saw him, was drinkin on
the sly what was left in the lasses. From the third room came sounds of
lauhter, the shoutin of familiar voices, the rowlin of a bear, and
eneral commotion. Some eiht or nine youn men were crowdin anxiously
round an open window. Three others were rompin with a youn bear, one
pullin him by the chain and tryin to set him at the others.

"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.

"Mind, no holdin on!" cried another.

"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kurain, you part our hands."

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."

"At one drauht, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.

"Jacob, brin a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who
stood in the midst of the roup, without a coat, and with his fine linen
shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya!
ood man!" cried he, addressin Pierre.

Another voice, from a man of medium heiht with clear blue eyes,
particularly strikin amon all these drunken voices by its sober rin,
cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov, an
officer of the Semenov reiment, a notorious ambler and duelist, who
was livin with Anatole. Pierre smiled, lookin about him merrily.

"I don't understand. What's it all about?"

"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, takin a
lass from the table he went up to Pierre.

"First of all you must drink!"

Pierre drank one lass after another, lookin from under his brows at
the tipsy uests who were aain crowdin round the window, and listenin
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refillin Pierre's lass while
explainin that Dolokhov was bettin with Stevens, an Enlish naval
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sittin on the outer lede
of the third floor window with his les hanin out.

"o on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, ivin Pierre the last
lass, "or I won't let you o!"

"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushin Anatole aside, and he went up to the
window.

Dolokhov was holdin the Enlishman's hand and clearly and distinctly
repeatin the terms of the bet, addressin himself particularly to
Anatole and Pierre.

Dolokhov was of medium heiht, with curly hair and liht-blue eyes. He
was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
so that his mouth, the most strikin feature of his face, was clearly
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
of the upper lip formed a sharp wede and closed firmly on the firm
lower one, and somethin like two distinct smiles played continually
round the two corners of the mouth; this, toether with the resolute,
insolent intellience of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means and
no connections. Yet, thouh Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,
Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footin that
all who knew them, includin Anatole himself, respected him more than
they did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all ames and nearly always won.
However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kurain
and Dolokhov were at that time notorious amon the rakes and scaperaces
of Petersbur.

The bottle of rum was brouht. The window frame which prevented anyone
from sittin on the outer sill was bein forced out by two footmen, who
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
the entlemen around.

Anatole with his swaerin air strode up to the window. He wanted to
smash somethin. Pushin away the footmen he tued at the frame, but
could not move it. He smashed a pane.

"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turnin to Pierre.

Pierre seized the crossbeam, tued, and wrenched the oak frame out with
a crash.

"Take it riht out, or they'll think I'm holdin on," said Dolokhov.

"Is the Enlishman brain?... Eh? Is it all riht?" said Anatole.

"First-rate," said Pierre, lookin at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum
in his hand was approachin the window, from which the liht of the sky,
the dawn merin with the afterlow of sunset, was visible.

Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window
sill. "Listen!" cried he, standin there and addressin those in the
room. All were silent.

"I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Enlishman miht
understand him, but he did not speak it very well--"I bet fifty
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, addressin
the Enlishman.

"No, fifty," replied the latter.

"All riht. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum
without takin it from my mouth, sittin outside the window on this
spot" (he stooped and pointed to the slopin lede outside the window)
"and without holdin on to anythin. Is that riht?"

"Quite riht," said the Enlishman.

Anatole turned to the Enlishman and takin him by one of the buttons of
his coat and lookin down at him--the Enlishman was short--bean
repeatin the terms of the waer to him in Enlish.

"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammerin with the bottle on the window sill to
attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kurain. Listen! If anyone else does the
same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"

The Enlishman nodded, but ave no indication whether he intended to
accept this challene or not. Anatole did not release him, and thouh he
kept noddin to show that he understood, Anatole went on translatin
Dolokhov's words into Enlish. A thin youn lad, an hussar of the Life
uards, who had been losin that evenin, climbed on the window sill,
leaned over, and looked down.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, lookin down from the window at the stones of
the pavement.

"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushin him away from the window. The lad
jumped awkwardly back into the room, trippin over his spurs.

Placin the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,
Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly throuh the window and lowered his
les. Pressin aainst both sides of the window, he adjusted himself on
his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the riht and then to the
left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brouht two candles and placed
them on the window sill, thouh it was already quite liht. Dolokhov's
back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from both
sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Enlishman in front. Pierre
stood smilin but silent. One man, older than the others present,
suddenly pushed forward with a scared and anry look and wanted to seize
hold of Dolokhov's shirt.

"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.

Anatole stopped him.

"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?...
What then?... Eh?"

Dolokhov turned round and, aain holdin on with both hands, arraned
himself on his seat.

"If anyone comes meddlin aain," said he, emittin the words separately
throuh his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now
then!"

Sayin this he aain turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
broken lass remained in that position without takin his eyes from the
window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood erect with starin eyes.
The Enlishman looked on sideways, pursin up his lips. The man who had
wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself
on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a
faint smile forot to fade thouh his features now expressed horror and
fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov
still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further back
till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holdin the
bottle was lifted hiher and hiher and trembled with the effort. The
bottle was emptyin perceptibly and risin still hiher and his head
tiltin yet further back. "Why is it so lon?" thouht Pierre. It seemed
to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made a
backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; this
was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the slopin
lede. As he bean slippin down, his head and arm wavered still more
with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, but
refrained from touchin it. Pierre aain covered his eyes and thouht he
would never open them aain. Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.
He looked up: Dolokhov was standin on the window sill, with a pale but
radiant face.

"It's empty."

He threw the bottle to the Enlishman, who cauht it neatly. Dolokhov
jumped down. He smelt stronly of rum.

"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take
you!" came from different sides.

The Enlishman took out his purse and bean countin out the money.
Dolokhov stood frownin and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window
sill.

"entlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thin!" he
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to brin me a
bottle. I'll do it.... Brin a bottle!"

"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smilin.

"What next? Have you one mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you o
iddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.

"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banin the
table with a determined and drunken esture and preparin to climb out
of the window.

They seized him by his arms; but he was so stron that everyone who
touched him was sent flyin.

"No, you'll never manae him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and
I'll et round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now we
are all oin to ----'s."

"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with
us."

And he cauht the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the round,
and bean dancin round the room with it.




CHAPTER X

Prince Vasili kept the promise he had iven to Princess Drubetskaya who
had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evenin of Anna
Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
made, and Boris transferred into the reiment of Semenov uards with the
rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna
Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went
straiht to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when
in the town and where her darlin Bory, who had only just entered a
reiment of the line and was bein at once transferred to the uards as
a cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a
time. The uards had already left Petersbur on the tenth of Auust, and
her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them
on the march to Radzivilov.

It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs--the
mother and the younest dauhter--both named Nataly. Ever since the
mornin, carriaes with six horses had been comin and oin
continually, brinin visitors to the Countess Rostova's bi house on
the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
her handsome eldest dauhter were in the drawin-room with the visitors
who came to conratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
relays.

The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
of face, evidently worn out with childbearin--she had had twelve. A
lanuor of motion and speech, resultin from weakness, ave her a
distinuished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
drawin room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The youn
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considerin it necessary to
take part in receivin the visitors. The count met the uests and saw
them off, invitin them all to dinner.

"I am very, very rateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he called
everyone without exception and without the slihtest variation in his
tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thank
you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keepin.
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On behalf
of the whole family I be you to come, mon cher!" These words he
repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the same
expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firm
pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as he
had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the
drawin room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreadin out
his les and puttin his hands on his knees with the air of a man who
enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with dinity,
offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,
sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident
French; then aain, like a man weary but unflinchin in the fulfillment
of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, strokin his scanty ray
hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his
way back from the anteroom he would pass throuh the conservatory and
pantry into the lare marble dinin hall, where tables were bein set
out for eihty people; and lookin at the footmen, who were brinin in
silver and china, movin tables, and unfoldin damask table linen, he
would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of ood family and the manaer of
all his affairs, and while lookin with pleasure at the enormous table
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that thins are all as they should
be? That's riht! The reat thin is the servin, that's it." And with a
complacent sih he would return to the drawin room.

"Marya Lvovna Karaina and her dauhter!" announced the countess'
iantic footman in his bass voice, enterin the drawin room. The
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a old snuffbox with
her husband's portrait on it.

"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more.
She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice,
as if sayin: "Very well, finish me off."

A tall, stout, and proud-lookin woman, with a round-faced smilin
dauhter, entered the drawin room, their dresses rustlin.

"Dear Countess, what an ae... She has been laid up, poor child... at
the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so
delihted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interruptin
one another and minlin with the rustlin of dresses and the scrapin
of chairs. Then one of those conversations bean which last out until,
at the first pause, the uests rise with a rustle of dresses and say, "I
am so delihted... Mamma's health... and Countess Apraksina..." and
then, aain rustlin, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,
and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: the
illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count
Bezukhov, and about his illeitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved
so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.

"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such bad
health, and now this vexation about his son is enouh to kill him!"

"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the
visitor alluded to, thouh she had already heard about the cause of
Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.

"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "It
seems that while he was abroad this youn man was allowed to do as he
liked, now in Petersbur I hear he has been doin such terrible thins
that he has been expelled by the police."

"You don't say so!" replied the countess.

"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to
heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov has
been deraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.
Anatole Kurain's father manaed somehow to et his son's affair hushed
up, but even he was ordered out of Petersbur."

"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.

"They are reular briands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor.
"He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, but
there, just fancy! Those three ot hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a
carriae, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The police tried
to interfere, and what did the youn men do? They tied a policeman and
the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there
was the bear swimmin about with the policeman on his back!"

"What a nice fiure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted the
count, dyin with lauhter.

"Oh, how dreadful! How can you lauh at it, Count?"

Yet the ladies themselves could not help lauhin.

"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well
educated and clever. This is all that his forein education has done for
him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of his
money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite declined: I have
my dauhters to consider."

"Why do you say this youn man is so rich?" asked the countess, turnin
away from the irls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "His
children are all illeitimate. I think Pierre also is illeitimate."

The visitor made a esture with her hand.

"I should think he has a score of them."

Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
wishin to show her connections and knowlede of what went on in
society.

"The fact of the matter is," said she sinificantly, and also in a half
whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count
of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."

"How handsome the old man still was only a year ao!" remarked the
countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."

"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was
sayin, Prince Vasili is the next heir throuh his wife, but the count
is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to the
Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is so ill
that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersbur-
-no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre or Prince
Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know it all very
well for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich is
my mother's second cousin. He's also my Bory's odfather," she added, as
if she attached no importance at all to the fact.

"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on some
inspection business," remarked the visitor.

"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The
fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearin how ill he
is."

"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; and
seein that the elder visitor was not listenin, he turned to the youn
ladies. "I can just imaine what a funny fiure that policeman cut!"

And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
aain shook with a deep rinin lauh, the lauh of one who always eats
well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he
said.




CHAPTER XI

Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smilin affably, but
not concealin the fact that she would not be distressed if they now
rose and took their leave. The visitor's dauhter was already smoothin
down her dress with an inquirin look at her mother, when suddenly from
the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and irls runnin to the
door and the noise of a chair fallin over, and a irl of thirteen,
hidin somethin in the folds of her short muslin frock, darted in and
stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident that she had not
intended her fliht to brin her so far. Behind her in the doorway
appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the uards,
a irl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.

The count jumped up and, swayin from side to side, spread his arms wide
and threw them round the little irl who had run in.

"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed lauhin. "My pet, whose name day it is.
My dear pet!"

"Ma chere, there is a time for everythin," said the countess with
feined severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turnin to her
husband.

"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name
day," said the visitor. "What a charmin child," she added, addressin
the mother.

This black-eyed, wide-mouthed irl, not pretty but full of life--with
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice,
with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little les in lace-
frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers--was just at that charmin ae
when a irl is no loner a child, thouh the child is not yet a youn
woman. Escapin from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the
lace of her mother's mantilla--not payin the least attention to her
severe remark--and bean to lauh. She lauhed, and in framentary
sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the
folds of her frock.

"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha manaed
to utter (to her everythin seemed funny). She leaned aainst her mother
and burst into such a loud, rinin fit of lauhter that even the prim
visitor could not help joinin in.

"Now then, o away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,
pushin away her dauhter with pretended sternness, and turnin to the
visitor she added: "She is my younest irl."

Natasha, raisin her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,
lanced up at her throuh tears of lauhter, and aain hid her face.

The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thouht it
necessary to take some part in it.

"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A
dauhter, I suppose?"

Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish
thins. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.

Meanwhile the youner eneration: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna's
son; Nicholas, the underraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, the
count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his younest boy, had
all settled down in the drawin room and were obviously tryin to
restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that
shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms, from which they
had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusin
than the drawin-room talk of society scandals, the weather, and
Countess Apraksina. Now and then they lanced at one another, hardly
able to suppress their lauhter.

The two youn men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
were of the same ae and both handsome fellows, thouh not alike. Boris
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had reular, delicate
features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
Dark hairs were already showin on his upper lip, and his whole face
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
the drawin room. He evidently tried to find somethin to say, but
failed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footin, and related
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
still quite a youn lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aed
durin the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
riht across the skull. Havin said this he lanced at Natasha. She
turned away from him and lanced at her youner brother, who was
screwin up his eyes and shakin with suppressed lauhter, and unable to
control herself any loner, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not lauh.

"You were meanin to o out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the
carriae?" he asked his mother with a smile.

"Yes, yes, o and tell them to et it ready," she answered, returnin
his smile.

Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump boy
ran after them anrily, as if vexed that their proram had been
disturbed.




CHAPTER XII

The only youn people remainin in the drawin room, not countin the
youn lady visitor and the countess' eldest dauhter (who was four years
older than her sister and behaved already like a rown-up person), were
Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with
a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by lon lashes, thick black
plaits coilin twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion
and especially in the color of her slender but raceful and muscular
arms and neck. By the race of her movements, by the softness and
flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve of
manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-rown kitten which promises
to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper to
show an interest in the eneral conversation by smilin, but in spite of
herself her eyes under their thick lon lashes watched her cousin who
was oin to join the army, with such passionate irlish adoration that
her smile could not for a sinle instant impose upon anyone, and it was
clear that the kitten had settled down only to sprin up with more
enery and aain play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like
Natasha and Boris, escape from the drawin room.

"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressin the visitor and pointin
to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so for
friendship's sake he is leavin the university and me, his old father,
and enterin the military service, my dear. And there was a place and
everythin waitin for him in the Archives Department! Isn't that
friendship?" remarked the count in an inquirin tone.

"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.

"They've been sayin so a lon while," said the count, "and they'll say
so aain and aain, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there's
friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joinin the hussars."

The visitor, not knowin what to say, shook her head.

"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flarin up and
turnin away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship
at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."

He lanced at his cousin and the youn lady visitor; and they were both
reardin him with a smile of approbation.

"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlorad Hussars, is dinin with us
today. He has been here on leave and is takin Nicholas back with him.
It can't be helped!" said the count, shruin his shoulders and
speakin playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.

"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish
to let me o, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the
army; I am not a diplomat or a overnment clerk.--I don't know how to
hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept lancin with the flirtatiousness
of a handsome youth at Sonya and the youn lady visitor.

The little kitten, feastin her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
to start her ambols aain and display her kittenish nature.

"All riht, all riht!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This
Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose
from an ensin and became Emperor. Well, well, od rant it," he added,
not noticin his visitor's sarcastic smile.

The elders bean talkin about Bonaparte. Julie Karaina turned to youn
Rostov.

"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull
without you," said she, ivin him a tender smile.

The youn man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
smile, and enaed the smilin Julie in a confidential conversation
without at all noticin that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
he lanced round at her. She ave him a passionately anry lance, and
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on
her lips, she ot up and left the room. All Nicholas' animation
vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.

"How plainly all these youn people wear their hearts on their sleeves!"
said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointin to Nicholas as he went out. "Cousinae--
danereux voisinae;" * she added.


* Cousinhood is a danerous neihborhood.

"Yes," said the countess when the brihtness these youn people had
brouht into the room had vanished; and as if answerin a question no
one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much sufferin,
how much anxiety one has had to o throuh that we miht rejoice in them
now! And yet really the anxiety is reater now than the joy. One is
always, always anxious! Especially just at this ae, so danerous both
for irls and boys."

"It all depends on the brinin up," remarked the visitor.

"Yes, you're quite riht," continued the countess. "Till now I have
always, thank od, been my children's friend and had their full
confidence," said she, repeatin the mistake of so many parents who
imaine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shall
always be my dauhters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with his
impulsive nature, does et into mischief (a boy can't help it), he will
all the same never be like those Petersbur youn men."

"Yes, they are splendid, splendid younsters," chimed in the count, who
always solved questions that seemed to him perplexin by decidin that
everythin was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's one
to do, my dear?"

"What a charmin creature your youner irl is," said the visitor; "a
little volcano!"

"Yes, a reular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a
voice she has; thouh she's my dauhter, I tell the truth when I say
she'll be a siner, a second Salomoni! We have enaed an Italian to
ive her lessons."

"Isn't she too youn? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it
at that ae."

"Oh no, not at all too youn!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers used
to be married at twelve or thirteen."

"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess
with a entle smile, lookin at Boris and went on, evidently concerned
with a thouht that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be
severe with her and to forbid it... oodness knows what they miht be up
to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissin), "but as it is, I
know every word she utters. She will come runnin to me of her own
accord in the evenin and tell me everythin. Perhaps I spoil her, but
really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter."

"Yes, I was brouht up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder
dauhter, Countess Vera, with a smile.

But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles enerally do; on
the contrary it ave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
expression. Vera was ood-lookin, not at all stupid, quick at learnin,
was well-brouht up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was true
and appropriate, yet, strane to say, everyone--the visitors and
countess alike--turned to look at her as if wonderin why she had said
it, and they all felt awkward.

"People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make
somethin exceptional of them," said the visitor.

"What's the ood of denyin it, my dear? Our dear countess was too
clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned out
splendidly all the same," he added, winkin at Vera.

The uests ot up and took their leave, promisin to return to dinner.

"What manners! I thouht they would never o," said the countess, when
she had seen her uests out.




CHAPTER XIII

When Natasha ran out of the drawin room she only went as far as the
conservatory. There she paused and stood listenin to the conversation
in the drawin room, waitin for Boris to come out. She was already
rowin impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not comin
at once, when she heard the youn man's discreet steps approachin
neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly amon the
flower tubs and hid there.

Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and oin up to a mirror examined
his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
waitin to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
lass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about to
call him but chaned her mind. "Let him look for me," thouht she.
Hardly had Boris one than Sonya, flushed, in tears, and mutterin
anrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked her first impulse to
run out to her, and remained in her hidin place, watchin--as under an
invisible cap--to see what went on in the world. She was experiencin a
new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, mutterin to herself, kept lookin
round toward the drawin-room door. It opened and Nicholas came in.

"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, runnin up
to her.

"It's nothin, nothin; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.

"Ah, I know what it is."

"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can o back to her!"

"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,
for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas takin her hand.

Sonya did not pull it away, and left off cryin. Natasha, not stirrin
and scarcely breathin, watched from her ambush with sparklin eyes.
"What will happen now?" thouht she.

"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everythin!"
said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."

"I don't like you to talk like that."

"Well, then, I won't; only forive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and
kissed her.

"Oh, how nice," thouht Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had one
out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.

"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and sinificant look. "I have
somethin to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the
conservatory to the place amon the tubs where she had been hidin.

Boris followed her, smilin.

"What is the somethin?" asked he.

She rew confused, lanced round, and, seein the doll she had thrown
down on one of the tubs, picked it up.

"Kiss the doll," said she.

Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eaer face, but did not
reply.

"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further
in amon the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she
whispered.

She cauht the youn officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
fear appeared on her flushed face.

"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,
lancin up at him from under her brows, smilin, and almost cryin from
excitement.

Boris blushed.

"How funny you are!" he said, bendin down to her and blushin still
more, but he waited and did nothin.

Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be hiher than he, embraced him so
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossin
back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.

Then she slipped down amon the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
and stood, hanin her head.

"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."

"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.

"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four
years... then I will ask for your hand."

Natasha considered.

"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender
little finers. "All riht! Then it's settled?"

A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eaer face.

"Settled!" replied Boris.

"Forever?" said the little irl. "Till death itself?"

She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoinin
sittin room.




CHAPTER XIV

After receivin her visitors, the countess was so tired that she ave
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to
dinner all who came "to conratulate." The countess wished to have a
tête-à-tête talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
Petersbur. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drew
her chair nearer to that of the countess.

"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not
many left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."

Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her
friend's hand.

"Vera," she said to her eldest dauhter who was evidently not a
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not
wanted here? o to the other irls, or..."

The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.

"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have one," she replied as
she rose to o to her own room.

But as she passed the sittin room she noticed two couples sittin, one
pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was
sittin close to Nicholas who was copyin out some verses for her, the
first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at the other window
and ceased talkin when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera
with uilty, happy faces.

It was pleasant and touchin to see these little irls in love; but
apparently the siht of them roused no pleasant feelin in Vera.

"How often have I asked you not to take my thins?" she said. "You have
a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.

"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dippin his pen.

"You always manae to do thins at the wron time," continued Vera. "You
came rushin into the drawin room so that everyone felt ashamed of
you."

Thouh what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She linered in the
room with the inkstand in her hand.

"And at your ae what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or
between you two? It's all nonsense!"

"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,
speakin very ently.

She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to
everyone.

"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"

"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, ettin warmer. "We
don't interfere with you and Ber."

"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anythin
wron in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behavin with
Boris."

"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have
nothin to complain of."

"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," said
Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slihtly. (She used the word
"diplomat," which was just then much in voue amon the children, in the
special sense they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And she
added, turnin to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've
never loved anyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de enlis and
nothin more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas, was
considered very stinin), "and your reatest pleasure is to be
unpleasant to people! o and flirt with Ber as much as you please," she
finished quickly.

"I shall at any rate not run after a youn man before visitors..."

"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"said
unpleasant thins to everyone and upset them. Let's o to the nursery."

All four, like a flock of scared birds, ot up and left the room.

"The unpleasant thins were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to
anyone."

"Madame de enlis! Madame de enlis!" shouted lauhin voices throuh
the door.

The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritatin and unpleasant effect
on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,
went to the lookin lass and arraned her hair and scarf. Lookin at
her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.

In the drawin room the conversation was still oin on.

"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either.
Don't I know that at the rate we are livin our means won't last lon?
It's all the Club and his easyoin nature. Even in the country do we
et any rest? Theatricals, huntin, and heaven knows what besides! But
don't let's talk about me; tell me how you manaed everythin. I often
wonder at you, Annette--how at your ae you can rush off alone in a
carriae to Moscow, to Petersbur, to those ministers and reat people,
and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishin. How did you
et thins settled? I couldn't possibly do it."

"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "od rant you never know what
it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love to
distraction! One learns many thins then," she added with a certain
pride. "That lawsuit tauht me much. When I want to see one of those bi
people I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with So
and-So,' and then I take a cab and o myself two, three, or four times--
till I et what I want. I don't mind what they think of me."

"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "You
see yours is already an officer in the uards, while my Nicholas is
oin as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom
did you apply?"

"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once areed to everythin, and
put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
enthusiastically, quite forettin all the humiliation she had endured
to ain her end.

"Has Prince Vasili aed much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him
since we acted toether at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has
forotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess,
with a smile.

"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowin
with amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said to
me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at your
command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation. But,
Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do anythin for his
happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now
a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, droppin her voice.
"My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no proress. Would you
believe it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equip
Boris." She took out her handkerchief and bean to cry. "I need five
hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a
state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. If
he will not assist his odson--you know he is Bory's odfather--and
allow him somethin for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
thrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."

The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.

"I often think, thouh, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that
here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... that
tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,
and Bory's life is only just beinnin...."

"Surely he will leave somethin to Boris," said the countess.

"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich randees are so selfish. Still,
I will take Boris and o to see him at once, and I shall speak to him
straiht out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all the
same to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now
two o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."

And like a practical Petersbur lady who knows how to make the most of
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
anteroom with him.

"ood-bye, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door,
and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me ood
luck."

"Are you oin to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the count
comin out from the dinin hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If he
is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, you
know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear. We
will see how Taras distinuishes himself today. He says Count Orlov
never ave such a dinner as ours will be!"




CHAPTER XV

"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess
Rostova's carriae in which they were seated drove over the straw
covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,
drawin her hand from beneath her old mantle and layin it timidly and
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. Count
Cyril Vladimirovich is your odfather after all, your future depends on
him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as you so well know how
to be."

"If only I knew that anythin besides humiliation would come of it..."
answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for your
sake."

Althouh the hall porter saw someone's carriae standin at the
entrance, after scrutinizin the mother and son (who without askin to
be announced had passed straiht throuh the lass porch between the
rows of statues in niches) and lookin sinificantly at the lady's old
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,
hearin that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
today, and that his excellency was not receivin anyone.

"We may as well o back," said the son in French.

"My dear!" exclaimed his mother implorinly, aain layin her hand on
his arm as if that touch miht soothe or rouse him.

Boris said no more, but looked inquirinly at his mother without takin
off his cloak.

"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in entle tones, addressin the hall
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why I
have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... I
only need see Prince Vasili Sereevich: he is stayin here, is he not?
Please announce me."

The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that ran upstairs, and turned
away.

"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sereevich," he called to a
footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, who
ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landin.

The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a lare
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
ascended the carpeted stairs.

"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulatin him by a touch,
"you promised me!"

The son, lowerin his eyes, followed her quietly.

They entered the lare hall, from which one of the doors led to the
apartments assined to Prince Vasili.

Just as the mother and son, havin reached the middle of the hall, were
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprun up as they
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili
came out--wearin a velvet coat with a sinle star on his breast, as was
his custom when at home--takin leave of a ood-lookin, dark-haired
man. This was the celebrated Petersbur doctor, Lorrain.

"Then it is certain?" said the prince.

"Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowin
his r's, and pronouncin the Latin words with a French accent.


* To err is human.

"Very well, very well..."

Seein Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. The
son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his
mother's face, and he smiled slihtly.

"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet aain! And how is our
dear invalid?" said she, as thouh unaware of the cold offensive look
fixed on her.

Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioninly and perplexed.
Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledin the bow turned
to Anna Mikhaylovna, answerin her query by a movement of the head and
lips indicatin very little hope for the patient.

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is
terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicatin Boris. "He
wanted to thank you himself."

Boris bowed aain politely.

"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never foret what you have
done for us."

"I am lad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna,"
said Prince Vasili, arranin his lace frill, and in tone and manner,
here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an
obliation, assumin an air of much reater importance than he had done
in Petersbur at Anna Scherer's reception.

"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressin Boris
with severity. "I am lad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in his
usual tone of indifference.

"I am awaitin orders to join my new reiment, your excellency," replied
Boris, betrayin neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor a
desire to enter into conversation, but speakin so quietly and
respectfully that the prince ave him a searchin lance.

"Are you livin with your mother?"

"I am livin at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, aain addin, "your
excellency."

"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said Anna
Mikhaylovna.

"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "I
never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a ambler too,
I am told."

"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic
smile, as thouh she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face aain
expressin deep sorrow.

"They ive little hope," replied the prince.

"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and
Boris. He is his odson," she added, her tone suestin that this fact
ouht to ive Prince Vasili much satisfaction.

Prince Vasili became thouhtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that
he was afraid of findin in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,
and hastened to reassure him.

"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said
she, utterin the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know
his character: noble, upriht... but you see he has no one with him
except the youn princesses.... They are still youn...." She bent her
head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make thins no
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We
women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these
thins. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for me. I
am used to sufferin."

Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done
at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to et rid of Anna
Mikhaylovna.

"Would not such a meetin be too tryin for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"
said he. "Let us wait until evenin. The doctors are expectin a
crisis."

"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the
welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
Christian..."

A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the
count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The lenth of her body
was strikinly out of proportion to her short les. Prince Vasili turned
to her.

"Well, how is he?"

"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said the
princess, lookin at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a straner.

"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy
smile, amblin lihtly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at
your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imaine what you have one
throuh," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.

The princess ave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as
Anna Mikhaylovna took off her loves and, occupyin the position she had
conquered, settled down in an armchair, invitin Prince Vasili to take a
seat beside her.

"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall o in to see the
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better o to Pierre meanwhile and
don't foret to ive him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to
dinner. I suppose he won't o?" she continued, turnin to the prince.

"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed,
"I shall be only too lad if you relieve me of that youn man.... Here
he is, and the count has not once asked for him."

He shrued his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one fliht of
stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.




CHAPTER XVI

Pierre, after all, had not manaed to choose a career for himself in
Petersbur, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.
Pierre had taken part in tyin a policeman to a bear. He had now been
for some days in Moscow and was stayin as usual at his father's house.
Thouh he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known
in Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorably
disposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count aainst him,
he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part of
the house. Enterin the drawin room, where the princesses spent most of
their time, he reeted the ladies, two of whom were sittin at
embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was
readin--the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two youner ones were
embroiderin: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that
one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre
was received as if he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess
paused in her readin and silently stared at him with frihtened eyes;
the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the younest,
the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,
bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusin scene
she foresaw. She drew her wool down throuh the canvas and, scarcely
able to refrain from lauhin, stooped as if tryin to make out the
pattern.

"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't reconize me?"

"I reconize you only too well, too well."

"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but
unabashed.

"The count is sufferin physically and mentally, and apparently you have
done your best to increase his mental sufferins."

"Can I see the count?" Pierre aain asked.

"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outriht, you can see
him... Ola, o and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is almost
time," she added, ivin Pierre to understand that they were busy, and
busy makin his father comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only
busy causin him annoyance.

Ola went out. Pierre stood lookin at the sisters; then he bowed and
said: "Then I will o to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
him."

And he left the room, followed by the low but rinin lauhter of the
sister with the mole.

Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He
sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are oin to
behave here as you did in Petersbur, you will end very badly; that is
all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must not
see him at all."

Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in
his rooms upstairs.

When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacin up and down his room,
stoppin occasionally at a corner to make menacin estures at the wall,
as if runnin a sword throuh an invisible foe, and larin savaely
over his spectacles, and then aain resumin his walk, mutterin
indistinct words, shruin his shoulders and esticulatin.

"Enland is done for," said he, scowlin and pointin his finer at
someone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rihts
of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that moment
imained himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the
danerous crossin of the Straits of Dover and captured London--could
pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome youn
officer enterin his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boris
was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forotten him, but in his usual
impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly
smile.

"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have
come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well."

"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbin him," answered
Pierre, tryin to remember who this youn man was.

Boris felt that Pierre did not reconize him but did not consider it
necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencin the least
embarrassment looked Pierre straiht in the face.

"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a
considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.

"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son,
Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how we
went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an ae..."

"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slihtly
sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I
never knew any Madame Jacquot."

Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.

"Oh dear, what am I thinkin about? I've mixed everythin up. One has so
many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we know
where we are. And what do you think of the Boulone expedition? The
Enlish will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon ets across the
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
doesn't make a mess of thins!"

Boris knew nothin about the Boulone expedition; he did not read the
papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.

"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothin
about it and have not thouht about it. Moscow is chiefly busy with
ossip," he continued. "Just now they are talkin about you and your
father."

Pierre smiled in his ood-natured way as if afraid for his companion's
sake that the latter miht say somethin he would afterwards reret. But
Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, lookin straiht into
Pierre's eyes.

"Moscow has nothin else to do but ossip," Boris went on. "Everybody is
wonderin to whom the count will leave his fortune, thouh he may
perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."

"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."

Pierre was still afraid that this officer miht inadvertently say
somethin disconcertin to himself.

"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushin slihtly, but not
chanin his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
tryin to et somethin out of the rich man?"

"So it does," thouht Pierre.

"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandins, that you are quite
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother amon such people. We are very
poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your
father is rich, I don't reard myself as a relation of his, and neither
I nor my mother would ever ask or take anythin from him."

For a lon time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped
up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy way,
and, blushin far more than Boris, bean to speak with a feelin of
minled shame and vexation.

"Well, this is strane! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know
very well..."

But Boris aain interrupted him.

"I am lad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You
must excuse me," said he, puttin Pierre at ease instead of bein put at
ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it a
rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
dinner at the Rostovs'?"

And Boris, havin apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
became quite pleasant aain.

"No, but I say," said Pierre, calmin down, "you are a wonderful fellow!
What you have just said is ood, very ood. Of course you don't know me.
We have not met for such a lon time... not since we were children. You
miht think that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not have
done it myself, I should not have had the courae, but it's splendid. I
am very lad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added after
a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He bean to lauh. "Well,
what of it! I hope we'll et better acquainted," and he pressed Boris'
hand. "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count. He has not
sent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"

"And so you think Napoleon will manae to et an army across?" asked
Boris with a smile.

Pierre saw that Boris wished to chane the subject, and bein of the
same mind he bean explainin the advantaes and disadvantaes of the
Boulone expedition.

A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was oin. Pierre, in
order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
and warmly pressin his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
into Boris' eyes. After he had one Pierre continued pacin up and down
the room for a lon time, no loner piercin an imainary foe with his
imainary sword, but smilin at the remembrance of that pleasant,
intellient, and resolute youn man.

As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this youn man and made up
his mind that they would be friends.

Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes
and her face was tearful.

"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was sayin, "but cost me what it may I
shall do my duty. I will come and spend the niht. He must not be left
like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put it
off. Perhaps od will help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu,
Prince! May od support you..."

"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turnin away from her.

"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when they
were in the carriae. "He hardly reconizes anybody."

"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the
son.

"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."

"But why do you expect that he will leave us anythin?"

"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"

"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."

"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.




CHAPTER XVII

After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a lon time all alone
applyin her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she ran.

"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who
kept her waitin some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll
find you another place."

The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliatin poverty,
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
found expression in callin her maid "my dear" and speakin to her with
exaerated politeness.

"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.

"Ask the count to come to me."

The count came waddlin in to see his wife with a rather uilty look as
usual.

"Well, little countess? What a saute of ame au madere we are to have,
my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not ill-
spent. He is worth it!"

He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands rufflin
his ray hair.

"What are your commands, little countess?"

"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointin to his
waistcoat. "It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well,
you see, Count, I want some money."

Her face became sad.

"Oh, little countess!"... and the count bean bustlin to et out his
pocketbook.

"I want a reat deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and takin out
her cambric handkerchief she bean wipin her husband's waistcoat.

"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a
tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush
to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"

Dmitri, a man of ood family who had been brouht up in the count's
house and now manaed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.

"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential
youn man who had entered. "Brin me..." he reflected a moment, "yes,
brin me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't brin me such
tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the
countess."

"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sihin deeply.

"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me to
inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticin that the count
was beinnin to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sin of
approachin aner. "I was forettin... Do you wish it brouht at once?"

"Yes, yes; just so! Brin it. ive it to the countess."

"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when the
youn man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him.
That's a thin I hate! Everythin is possible."

"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said
the countess. "But I am in reat need of this sum."

"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,
and havin kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.

When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all in
clean notes, was lyin ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that somethin was aitatin
her.

"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.

"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."

"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess bean, with a
blush that looked very strane on her thin, dinified, elderly face, and
she took the money from under the handkerchief.

Anna Mikhaylovna instantly uessed her intention and stooped to be ready
to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.

"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."

Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracin her and weepin. The countess
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
kindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to think
about such a base thin as money, and because their youth was over....
But those tears were pleasant to them both.




CHAPTER XVIII

Countess Rostova, with her dauhters and a lare number of uests, was
already seated in the drawin room. The count took the entlemen into
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. From
time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were
expectin Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible
draon, a lady distinuished not for wealth or rank, but for common
sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the
Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersbur, and both cities
wondered at her, lauhed privately at her rudenesses, and told ood
stories about her, while none the less all without exception respected
and feared her.

In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of war
that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruitin. None
of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.
The count sat on the sofa between two uests who were smokin and
talkin. He neither smoked nor talked, but bendin his head first to one
side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure and
listened to the conversation of his two neihbors, whom he eed on
aainst each other.

One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled
face, already rowin old, thouh he was dressed like a most fashionable
youn man. He sat with his les up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
havin stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhalin the
smoke spasmodically and screwin up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,
Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tonue" as they
said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescendin to his companion.
The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the uards, irreproachably washed,
brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with
red lips ently inhaled the smoke, lettin it escape from his handsome
mouth in rins. This was Lieutenant Ber, an officer in the Semenov
reiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about whom
Natasha had teased her elder sister Vera, speakin of Ber as her
"intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively. His
favorite occupation when not playin boston, a card ame he was very
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in settin
two loquacious talkers at one another.

"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said
Shinshin, lauhin ironically and mixin the most ordinary Russian
expressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity of
his speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want
to make somethin out of your company?"


* You expect to make an income out of the overnment.

"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the
advantaes are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
position now, Peter Nikolaevich..."

Ber always spoke quietly, politely, and with reat precision. His
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearin
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without bein at all put
out of countenance himself or makin others uncomfortable, but as soon
as the conversation concerned himself he would bein to talk
circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.

"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should
et not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the
rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said
he, lookin at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile, as
if it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chief
desire of everyone else.

"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanin into the uards I shall
be in a more prominent position," continued Ber, "and vacancies occur
much more frequently in the Foot uards. Then just think what can be
done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manae to put a little
aside and to send somethin to my father," he went on, emittin a smoke
rin.

"La balance y est... * A erman knows how to skin a flint, as the
proverb says," remarked Shinshin, movin his pipe to the other side of
his mouth and winkin at the count.


* So that squares matters.

The count burst out lauhin. The other uests seein that Shinshin was
talkin came up to listen. Ber, oblivious of irony or indifference,
continued to explain how by exchanin into the uards he had already
ained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime the
company commander miht et killed and he, as senior in the company,
miht easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
the reiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Ber evidently
enjoyed narratin all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,
too, miht have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
sedate, and the naivete of his youthful eotism was so obvious, that he
disarmed his hearers.

"Well, my boy, you'll et alon wherever you o--foot or horse--that
I'll warrant," said Shinshin, pattin him on the shoulder and takin his
feet off the sofa.

Ber smiled joyously. The count, by his uests, went into the drawin
room.

It was just the moment before a bi dinner when the assembled uests,
expectin the summons to zakuska, * avoid enain in any lon
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order to
show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
hostess look toward the door, and now and then lance at one another,
and the visitors try to uess from these lances who, or what, they are
waitin for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
that is not yet ready.


* Hors d'oeuvres.

Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sittin awkwardly in the
middle of the drawin room on the first chair he had come across,
blockin the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but
he went on naively lookin around throuh his spectacles as if in search
of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He was in
the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of the
uests, knowin of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity at
this bi, stout, quiet man, wonderin how such a clumsy, modest fellow
could have played such a prank on a policeman.

"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.

"Oui, madame," replied he, lookin around him.

"You have not yet seen my husband?"

"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.

"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very
interestin."

"Very interestin."

The countess exchaned lances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latter
understood that she was bein asked to entertain this youn man, and
sittin down beside him she bean to speak about his father; but he
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
uests were all conversin with one another. "The Razumovskis... It was
charmin... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on all
sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.

"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.

"Herself," came the answer in a rouh voice, and Marya Dmitrievna
entered the room.

All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very
oldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
holdin hih her fifty-year-old head with its ray curls, she stood
surveyin the uests, and leisurely arraned her wide sleeves as if
rollin them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.

"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keepin and to her
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turnin to the count who
was kissin her hand, "you're feelin dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere
to hunt with your dos? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how
these nestlins are rowin up," and she pointed to the irls. "You must
look for husbands for them whether you like it or not...."

"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
fearless and ay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a irl, but
I like her."

She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrins from her hue reticule and,
havin iven them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure of
her saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
Pierre.

"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assumin a soft hih tone
of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her
sleeves still hiher. Pierre approached, lookin at her in a childlike
way throuh his spectacles.

"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
evident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.

"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed and
he amuses himself settin a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,
for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."

She turned away and ave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep
from lauhin.

"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.

The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed on
the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
Nicholas was to o with him to the reiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovna
with Shinshin. Ber ave his arm to Vera. The smilin Julie Karaina
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, fillin the
whole dinin hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and overnesses
followed sinly. The footmen bean movin about, chairs scraped, the
band struck up in the allery, and the uests settled down in their
places. Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced by
the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the soft
steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
Marya Dmitrievna on her riht and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the
other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male
visitors on his riht. Midway down the lon table on one side sat the
rownup youn people: Vera beside Ber, and Pierre beside Boris; and on
the other side, the children, tutors, and overnesses. From behind the
crystal decanters and fruit vases, the count kept lancin at his wife
and her tall cap with its liht-blue ribbons, and busily filled his
neihbors' lasses, not nelectin his own. The countess in turn,
without omittin her duties as hostess, threw sinificant lances from
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by
their redness to contrast more than usual with his ray hair. At the
ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
colonel of hussars who, rowin more and more flushed, ate and drank so
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other uests. Ber
with tender smiles was sayin to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
heavenly feelin. Boris was tellin his new friend Pierre who the uests
were and exchanin lances with Natasha, who was sittin opposite.
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a reat deal. Of
the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the
ame without omittin a sinle dish or one of the wines. These latter
the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behind
the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hunarian"...
or "Rhine wine" as the case miht be. Of the four crystal lasses
enraved with the count's monoram that stood before his plate, Pierre
held out one at random and drank with enjoyment, azin with ever-
increasin amiability at the other uests. Natasha, who sat opposite,
was lookin at Boris as irls of thirteen look at the boy they are in
love with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that same
look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little irl's look made him
inclined to lauh without knowin why.

Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karaina, to whom
he was aain talkin with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore a
company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and
Julie were sayin to one another. The overness kept lookin round
uneasily as if preparin to resent any sliht that miht be put upon the
children. The erman tutor was tryin to remember all the dishes, wines,
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
to his people in ermany; and he felt reatly offended when the butler
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, tryin to
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
reediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
knowlede.




CHAPTER XIX

At the men's end of the table the talk rew more and more animated. The
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
Petersbur and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
forwarded by courier to the commander-in-chief.

"And why the deuce are we oin to fiht Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.
"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."

The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric erman, evidently devoted to
the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.

"It is for the reasson, my oot sir," said he, speakin with a erman
accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze
manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze daner vreatenin
Russia and zat ze safety and dinity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity
of its alliances..." he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as
if in it lay the ist of the matter.

Then with the unerrin official memory that characterized him he
repeated from the openin words of the manifesto:

... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute aim-
-to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided him
to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition for
the attainment of that purpose.

"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinkin a tumbler of wine
with dinity and lookin to the count for approval.

"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckerin his brows and smilin.
"Cela nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now--he knew what he was
about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to find
Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually chanin
from French to Russian.


*Do you know the proverb?

*(2) That suits us down to the round.

*(3) Hollow.

*(4) I just ask you that.

"Ve must viht to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel,
thumpin the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dwelt
particularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, aain
turnin to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere's
an end of it! And how do you, a youn man and a youn hussar, how do you
jude of it?" he added, addressin Nicholas, who when he heard that the
war was bein discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears
intent on the colonel.

"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flamin up, turnin his
plate round and movin his winelasses about with as much decision and
desperation as thouh he were at that moment facin some reat daner.
"I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,
conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarks
were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore
awkward.

"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.

Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down
to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speakin.

Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvinly.

"That's fine," said he.

"The youn man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, aain thumpin the
table.

"What are you makin such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What are
you thumpin the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why are
you excitin yourself? Do you think the French are here?"

"I am speakin ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.

"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my
son's oin, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is oin."

"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in od's
hands. You may die in your bed or od may spare you in a battle,"
replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the whole
lenth of the table.

"That's true!"

Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and
the men's at the other.

"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was sayin; "I know you won't
ask!"

"I will," replied Natasha.

Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half
rose, by a lance invitin Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
was comin, and turnin to her mother:

"Mamma!" ran out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,
audible the whole lenth of the table.

"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seein by her dauhter's
face that it was only mischief, she shook a finer at her sternly with a
threatenin and forbiddin movement of her head.

The conversation was hushed.

"Mamma! What sweets are we oin to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded
still more firm and resolute.

The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her
fat finer.

"Cossack!" she said threateninly.

Most of the uests, uncertain how to reard this sally, looked at the
elders.

"You had better take care!" said the countess.

"Mamma! What sweets are we oin to have?" Natasha aain cried boldly,
with saucy aiety, confident that her prank would be taken in ood part.

Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with lauhter.

"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to
Pierre, lancin at him aain.

"Ice puddin, but you won't et any," said Marya Dmitrievna.

Natasha saw there was nothin to be afraid of and so she braved even
Marya Dmitrievna.

"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice puddin? I don't like ice cream."

"Carrot ices."

"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "I
want to know!"

Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out lauhin, and all the uests
joined in. Everyone lauhed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
incredible boldness and smartness of this little irl who had dared to
treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.

Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champane was served round. The band
aain struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the uests, leavin
their seats, went up to "conratulate" the countess, and reached across
the table to clink lasses with the count, with the children, and with
one another. Aain the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in the
same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the uests
returned to the drawin room and to the count's study.




CHAPTER XX

The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawin rooms, some in the
sittin room, some in the library.

The count, holdin his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from
droppin into his usual after-dinner nap, and lauhed at everythin. The
youn people, at the countess' instiation, athered round the
clavichord and harp. Julie by eneral request played first. After she
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
other youn ladies in bein Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for
their musical talent, to sin somethin. Natasha, who was treated as
thouh she were rown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
same time felt shy.

"What shall we sin?" she said.

"'The Brook,'" suested Nicholas.

"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where
is Sonya?"

She looked round and seein that her friend was not in the room ran to
look for her.

Runnin into Sonya's room and not findin her there, Natasha ran to the
nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she must
be on the chest in the passae. The chest in the passae was the place
of mournin for the youner female eneration in the Rostov household.
And there in fact was Sonya lyin face downward on Nurse's dirty feather
bed on the top of the chest, crumplin her auzy pink dress under her,
hidin her face with her slender finers, and sobbin so convulsively
that her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been so
radiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly chaned: her eyes became
fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of
her mouth drooped.

"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And
Natasha's lare mouth widened, makin her look quite uly, and she bean
to wail like a baby without knowin why, except that Sonya was cryin.
Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her face
still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sittin on the blue-striped
feather bed and huin her friend. With an effort Sonya sat up and
bean wipin her eyes and explainin.

"Nicholas is oin away in a week's time, his... papers... have come...
he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed a
paper she held in her hand--with the verses Nicholas had written,
"still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... what
a soul he has!"

And she bean to cry aain because he had such a noble soul.

"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris
also," she went on, ainin a little strenth; "he is nice... there are
no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would
have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it can't be done.
And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon the countess as her
mother and called her so) "that I am spoilin Nicholas' career and am
heartless and unrateful, while truly... od is my witness," and she
made the sin of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, only
Vera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so rateful to you
that I would willinly sacrifice everythin, only I have nothin...."

Sonya could not continue, and aain hid her face in her hands and in the
feather bed. Natasha bean consolin her, but her face showed that she
understood all the ravity of her friend's trouble.

"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had uessed the true reason
of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said somethin to you since
dinner? Hasn't she?"

"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and
she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that I
was unrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me, but
that he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day...
Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."

And aain she bean to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted
her up, hued her, and, smilin throuh her tears, bean comfortin
her.

"Sonya, don't believe her, darlin! Don't believe her! Do you remember
how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sittin room after
supper? Why, we settled how everythin was to be. I don't quite remember
how, but don't you remember that it could all be arraned and how nice
it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first
cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Boris says it is
quite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is so
clever and so ood!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,
darlin Sonya!" and she kissed her and lauhed. "Vera's spiteful; never
mind her! And all will come riht and she won't say anythin to Mamma.
Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."

Natasha kissed her on the hair.

Sonya sat up. The little kitten brihtened, its eyes shone, and it
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and bein
playin with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.

"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothin her
frock and hair.

"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushin in a crisp lock that had
strayed from under her friend's plaits.

Both lauhed.

"Well, let's o and sin 'The Brook.'"

"Come alon!"

"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said
Natasha, stoppin suddenly. "I feel so happy!"

And she set off at a run alon the passae.

Sonya, shakin off some down which clun to her and tuckin away the
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
after Natasha down the passae into the sittin room with flushed face
and liht, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the youn people san
the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delihted. Then
Nicholas san a son he had just learned:


At nihttime in the moon's fair low How sweet, as fancies wander free,
To feel that in this world there's one Who still is thinkin but of
thee!

That while her finers touch the harp Waftin sweet music o'er the lea,
It is for thee thus swells her heart, Sihin its messae out to thee...

A day or two, then bliss unspoilt, But oh! till then I cannot live!...

He had not finished the last verse before the youn people bean to et
ready to dance in the lare hall, and the sound of the feet and the
couhin of the musicians were heard from the allery.

Pierre was sittin in the drawin-room where Shinshin had enaed him,
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music bean
Natasha came in and walkin straiht up to Pierre said, lauhin and
blushin:

"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."

"I am afraid of mixin the fiures," Pierre replied; "but if you will be
my teacher..." And lowerin his bi arm he offered it to the slender
little irl.

While the couples were arranin themselves and the musicians tunin up,
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy;
she was dancin with a rown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
sittin in a conspicuous place and talkin to him like a rown-up lady.
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had iven her to hold.
Assumin quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fannin herself and
smilin over the fan.

"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossed
the ballroom, pointin to Natasha.

Natasha blushed and lauhed.

"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"

In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs bein
pushed back in the sittin room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had
been playin cards with the majority of the more distinuished and older
visitors. They now, stretchin themselves after sittin so lon, and
replacin their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First came
Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The count,
with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to
Marya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair allantry lit
up his face and as soon as the last fiure of the ecossaise was ended,
he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their allery,
addressin the first violin:

"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"

This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.
(Strictly speakin, Daniel Cooper was one fiure of the anlaise.)

"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite
forettin that she was dancin with a rown-up partner she bent her
curly head to her knees and made the whole room rin with her lauhter.

And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the
jovial old entleman, who standin beside his tall and stout partner,
Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straihtened his
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped ently with his foot, and, by a
smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively ay
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resemblin those of a merry peasant
dance) bean to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
filled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on the
other--who with beamin faces had come to see their master makin merry.

"Just look at the master! A reular eale he is!" loudly remarked the
nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.

The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not
want to dance well. Her enormous fiure stood erect, her powerful arms
hanin down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
by the whole of the count's plump fiure, in Marya Dmitrievna found
expression only in her more and more beamin face and quiverin nose.
But if the count, ettin more and more into the swin of it, charmed
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the
aility with which he capered about on his liht feet, Marya Dmitrievna
produced no less impression by sliht exertions--the least effort to
move her shoulders or bend her arms when turnin, or stamp her foot--
which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual severity.
The dance rew livelier and livelier. The other couples could not
attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not even
try to do so. All were watchin the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha
kept pullin everyone by sleeve or dress, urin them to "look at Papa!"
thouh as it was they never took their eyes off the couple. In the
intervals of the dance the count, breathin deeply, waved and shouted to
the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster; lihtly, more
lihtly, and yet more lihtly whirled the count, flyin round Marya
Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until, turnin his
partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raisin his soft
foot backwards, bowin his perspirin head, smilin and makin a wide
sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and lauhter led by
Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathin heavily and wipin their
faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.

"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.

"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tuckin up her
sleeves and puffin heavily.




CHAPTER XXI

While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anlaise was bein danced, to a
tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and
cooks were ettin the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke. The
doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession,
communion was administered to the dyin man, preparations made for the
sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill
of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond the ates,
a roup of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriae drove up, waited in
expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The Military
overnor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sendin aides-de-camp to
inquire after the count's health, came himself that evenin to bid a
last farewell to the celebrated randee of Catherine's court, Count
Bezukhov.

The manificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up
respectfully when the Military overnor, havin stayed about half an
hour alone with the dyin man, passed out, slihtly acknowledin their
bows and tryin to escape as quickly as possible from the lances fixed
on him by the doctors, clery, and relatives of the family. Prince
Vasili, who had rown thinner and paler durin the last few days,
escorted him to the door, repeatin somethin to him several times in
low tones.

When the Military overnor had one, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on
a chair in the ballroom, crossin one le hih over the other, leanin
his elbow on his knee and coverin his face with his hand. After sittin
so for a while he rose, and, lookin about him with frihtened eyes,
went with unusually hurried steps down the lon corridor leadin to the
back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.

Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dyin man's
room, rew silent and azed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
his door, which creaked slihtly when opened.

"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed," said
an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was
listenin naively to his words.

"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,
addin the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own
on the subject.

"Ah, madam, it is a reat sacrament," replied the priest, passin his
hand over the thin rizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald
head.

"Who was that? The Military overnor himself?" was bein asked at the
other side of the room. "How youn-lookin he is!"

"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no loner reconizes
anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."

"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."

The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red
from weepin and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sittin in a
raceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leanin his elbow on a
table.

"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather.
"The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as
if one were in the country."

"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sih. "So he may have
somethin to drink?"

Lorrain considered.

"Has he taken his medicine?"

"Yes."

The doctor lanced at his watch.

"Take a lass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and
he indicated with his delicate finers what he meant by a pinch.

"Dere has neffer been a ase," a erman doctor was sayin to an aide-de-
camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."

"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "And
who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.

"It von't o bein," replied the erman with a smile.

Everyone aain looked toward the door, which creaked as the second
princess went in with the drink she had prepared accordin to Lorrain's
instructions. The erman doctor went up to Lorrain.

"Do you think he can last till mornin?" asked the erman, addressin
Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.

Lorrain, pursin up his lips, waved a severely neative finer before
his nose.

"Toniht, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at bein able clearly to understand
and state the patient's condition.

Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.

In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burnin before
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a hih, white feather bed was
just visible behind a screen. A small do bean to bark.

"Ah, is it you, cousin?"

She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
varnish.

"Has anythin happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."

"No, there is no chane. I only came to have a talk about business,
Catiche," * muttered the prince, seatin himself wearily on the chair
she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I must say," he
remarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."


*Catherine.

"I thouht perhaps somethin had happened," she said with her unchanin
stonily severe expression; and, sittin down opposite the prince, she
prepared to listen.

"I wished to et a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."

"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, takin her hand and bendin it
downwards as was his habit.

It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both
understood without namin.

The princess, who had a straiht, riid body, abnormally lon for her
les, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sin of emotion in her
prominent ray eyes. Then she shook her head and lanced up at the icons
with a sih. This miht have been taken as an expression of sorrow and
devotion, or of weariness and hope of restin before lon. Prince Vasili
understood it as an expression of weariness.

"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out as
a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very
serious talk."

Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks bean to twitch nervously, now
on one side, now on the other, ivin his face an unpleasant expression
which was never to be seen on it in a drawin room. His eyes too seemed
strane; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next
lanced round in alarm.

The princess, holdin her little do on her lap with her thin bony
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved
not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till mornin.

"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"
continued Prince Vasili, returnin to his theme, apparently not without
an inner strule; "at such a moment as this one must think of
everythin. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
all, like children of my own, as you know."

The princess continued to look at him without movin, and with the same
dull expression.

"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili
went on, testily pushin away a little table without lookin at her.
"You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my wife--
are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is for you
to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me; but, my dear,
I am ettin on for sixty and must be prepared for anythin. Do you know
I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointin to his portrait,
"definitely demanded that he should be called."

Prince Vasili looked questioninly at the princess, but could not make
out whether she was considerin what he had just said or whether she was
simply lookin at him.

"There is one thin I constantly pray od to rant, mon cousin," she
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his
noble soul peacefully to leave this..."

"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbin
his bald head and anrily pullin back toward him the little table that
he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourself
that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his
property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."

"He has made wills enouh!" quietly remarked the princess. "But he
cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illeitimate."

"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutchin the little table
and becomin more animated and talkin more rapidly: "what if a letter
has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's
leitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count's
services, his request would be ranted?..."

The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the
subject under discussion than those they are talkin with.

"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizin her hand, "that
letter was written, thouh it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.
The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon
as all is over," and Prince Vasili sihed to intimate what he meant by
the words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will and
letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainly
be ranted. Pierre will et everythin as the leitimate son."

"And our share?" asked the princess smilin ironically, as if anythin
miht happen, only not that.

"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as dayliht! He will then be the
leal heir to everythin and you won't et anythin. You must know, my
dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
ouht to know where they are, and must find them, because..."

"What next?" the princess interrupted, smilin sardonically and not
chanin the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we are
all stupid; but I know this: an illeitimate son cannot inherit... un
batard!" * she added, as if supposin that this translation of the word
would effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his
contention.


* A bastard.

"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intellient,
how is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the
Emperor bein him to reconize Pierre as leitimate, it follows that
Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then
inherit everythin under the will? And if the will and letter are not
destroyed, then you will have nothin but the consolation of havin been
dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."


* And all that follows therefrom.

"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,
mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with
the expression women assume when they suppose they are sayin somethin
witty and stinin.

"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," bean Prince Vasili impatiently,
"I came here not to wranle with you, but to talk about your interests
as with a kinswoman, a ood, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the
tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
favor are amon the count's papers, then, my dear irl, you and your
sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe an
expert. I have just been talkin to Dmitri Onufrich" (the family
solicitor) "and he says the same."

At this a sudden chane evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her
thin lips rew white, thouh her eyes did not chane, and her voice when
she bean to speak passed throuh such transitions as she herself
evidently did not expect.

"That would be a fine thin!" said she. "I never wanted anythin and I
don't now."

She pushed the little do off her lap and smoothed her dress.

"And this is ratitude--this is reconition for those who have
sacrificed everythin for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I
don't want anythin, Prince."

"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied
Prince Vasili.

But the princess did not listen to him.

"Yes, I knew it lon ao but had forotten. I knew that I could expect
nothin but meanness, deceit, envy, intriue, and inratitude--the
blackest inratitude--in this house..."

"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,
his cheeks twitchin more than ever.

"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
been intriuin!"

The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
She ave her companion an anry lance.

"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was
all done casually in a moment of aner, of illness, and was afterwards
forotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
last moments by not lettin him commit this injustice, and not to let
him die feelin that he is renderin unhappy those who..."

"Who sacrificed everythin for him," chimed in the princess, who would
aain have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "thouh he
never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sih, "I
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has
to be cunnin and cruel."

"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."

"No, I have a wicked heart."

"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and
wish you to have as ood an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.
You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,
no doubt, forotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand that
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
only reason for bein here. I came simply to help him and you."

"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriuin--I know!" cried the
princess.

"That's not the point, my dear."

"It's that protee of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
woman!"

"Do not let us lose any time..."

"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told
the count such vile, disraceful thins about us, especially about
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
would not see us for a whole fortniht. I know it was then he wrote this
vile, infamous paper, but I thouht the thin was invalid."

"We've ot to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"

"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the
princess, inorin his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin, a
reat sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
princess, now quite chaned. "And what does she come wormin herself in
here for? But I will ive her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"




CHAPTER XXII

While these conversations were oin on in the reception room and the
princess' room, a carriae containin Pierre (who had been sent for) and
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was drivin
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, havin turned with
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in his
corner and woke him up. Rousin himself, Pierre followed Anna
Mikhaylovna out of the carriae, and only then bean to think of the
interview with his dyin father which awaited him. He noticed that they
had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he was
ettin down from the carriae steps two men, who looked like
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
the wall. Pausin for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of the
same kind hidin in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither
Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not help
seein these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all
riht," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly
ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, callin to Pierre, who
was lain behind, to follow. Thouh he did not see why it was
necessary for him to o to the count at all, still less why he had to o
by the back stairs, yet judin by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
carryin pails, came runnin downstairs, their boots clatterin. These
men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
and did not evince the least surprise at seein them there.

"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna
of one of them.

"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anythin were now
permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."

"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the
landin. "I'd better o to my own room."

Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.

"Ah, my friend!" she said, touchin his arm as she had done her son's
when speakin to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
you do, but be a man!"

"But really, hadn't I better o away?" he asked, lookin kindly at her
over his spectacles.

"Ah, my dear friend! Foret the wrons that may have been done you.
Think that he is your father... perhaps in the aony of death." She
sihed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
me, Pierre. I shall not foret your interests."

Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
to be rew stroner, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
already openin a door.

This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
princesses, sat in a corner knittin a stockin. Pierre had never been
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressin a maid who was hurryin past
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
princess' health and then led Pierre alon a stone passae. The first
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with the
decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everythin in the house
was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in
passin instinctively lanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess were sittin close toether talkin. Seein them pass,
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
jumped up and with a esture of desperation slammed the door with all
her miht.

This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on
Prince Vasili's face so out of keepin with his dinity that Pierre
stopped and lanced inquirinly over his spectacles at his uide. Anna
Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sihed, as
if to say that this was no more than she had expected.

"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in
reply to his look, and went still faster alon the passae.

Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
"watchin over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
thins had to be. From the passae they went into a lare, dimly lit
room adjoinin the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but
even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been
spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a
servant who passed out on tiptoe without heedin them. They went into
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows openin
into the conservatory, with its lare bust and full lenth portrait of
Catherine the reat. The same people were still sittin here in almost
the same positions as before, whisperin to one another. All became
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
entered, and at the bi stout fiure of Pierre who, hanin his head,
meekly followed her.

Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersbur lady she now,
keepin Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
that afternoon. She felt that as she brouht with her the person the
dyin man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Castin a rapid
lance at all those in the room and noticin the count's confessor
there, she lided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowin yet
seemin to row suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessin
first of one and then of another priest.

"od be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This youn man is the
count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"

Havin said this she went up to the doctor.

"Dear doctor," said she, "this youn man is the count's son. Is there
any hope?"

The doctor cast a rapid lance upwards and silently shrued his
shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
shoulders and eyes, almost closin the latter, sihed, and moved away
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
tenderly sad voice, she said:

"Trust in His mercy!" and pointin out a small sofa for him to sit and
wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
watchin and it creaked very slihtly as she disappeared behind it.

Pierre, havin made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
with somethin more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
whispered to one another, castin sinificant looks at him with a kind
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
received was shown him. A strane lady, the one who had been talkin to
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
and returned a love Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
pick up the love himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
that toniht he was a person oblied to perform some sort of awful rite
which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to
accept their services. He took the love in silence from the aide-de-
camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placin his hue hands
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Eyptian statue,
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
order not to lose his head and do foolish thins he must not act on his
own ideas toniht, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
those who were uidin him.

Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect
majestically entered the room. He was wearin his lon coat with three
stars on his breast. He seemed to have rown thinner since the mornin;
his eyes seemed larer than usual when he lanced round and noticed
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thin he never used to do),
and drew it downwards as if wishin to ascertain whether it was firmly
fixed on.

"Courae, courae, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"
and he turned to o.

But Pierre thouht it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not
knowin whether it would be proper to call the dyin man "the count,"
yet ashamed to call him "father."

"He had another stroke about half an hour ao. Courae, my friend..."

Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
suested to him a blow from somethin. He looked at Prince Vasili in
perplexity, and only later rasped that a stroke was an attack of
illness. Prince Vasili said somethin to Lorrain in passin and went
throuh the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
Throuh that door was heard a noise of thins bein moved about, and at
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
in the dischare of duty, ran out and touchin Pierre lihtly on the arm
said:

"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.
Come."

Pierre went in at the door, steppin on the soft carpet, and noticed
that the strane lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
enter that room.




CHAPTER XXIII

Pierre well knew this lare room divided by columns and an arch, its
walls hun round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
columns, with a hih silk-curtained mahoany bedstead on one side and on
the other an immense case containin icons, was brihtly illuminated
with red liht like a Russian church durin evenin service. Under the
leamin icons stood a lon invalid chair, and in that chair on snowy-
white smooth pillows, evidently freshly chaned, Pierre saw--covered to
the waist by a briht reen quilt--the familiar, majestic fiure of his
father, Count Bezukhov, with that ray mane of hair above his broad
forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep characteristically
noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons;
his lare thick hands outside the quilt. Into the riht hand, which was
lyin palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefiner and
thumb, and an old servant, bendin over from behind the chair, held it
in position. By the chair stood the priests, their lon hair fallin
over their manificent litterin vestments, with lihted tapers in
their hands, slowly and solemnly conductin the service. A little behind
them stood the two youner princesses holdin handkerchiefs to their
eyes, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with a
vicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as thouh
declarin to all that she could not answer for herself should she lance
round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, and all-forivin
expression on her face, stood by the door near the strane lady. Prince
Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax taper in his
left hand, was leanin his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chair
he had turned round for the purpose, and was crossin himself with his
riht hand, turnin his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead.
His face wore a calm look of piety and resination to the will of od.
"If you do not understand these sentiments," he seemed to be sayin, "so
much the worse for you!"

Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants; the
men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossin
themselves, and the readin of the church service, the subdued chantin
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sihs and the shufflin of
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standin and ave him a
taper. He lit it and, distracted by observin those around him, bean
crossin himself with the hand that held the taper.

Sophie, the rosy, lauhter-lovin, younest princess with the mole,
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
with it hidden for awhile; then lookin up and seein Pierre she aain
bean to lauh. She evidently felt unable to look at him without
lauhin, but could not resist lookin at him: so to be out of
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
to one another, and the old servant who was holdin the count's hand ot
up and said somethin to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
and, stoopin over the dyin man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leanin aainst one of the
columns in a respectful attitude implyin that he, a foreiner, in spite
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
now bein performed and even approved of it. He now approached the sick
man with the noiseless step of one in full vior of life, with his
delicate white finers raised from the reen quilt the hand that was
free, and turnin sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The
sick man was iven somethin to drink, there was a stir around him, then
the people resumed their places and the service continued. Durin this
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
had been leanin, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
for them--did not o up to the dyin man, but passed by him, joined the
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
the hih bedstead with its silken hanins. On leavin the bed both
Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned
to their places one after the other before the service was concluded.
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of
what went on, havin made up his mind once for all that what he saw
happenin around him that evenin was in some way essential.

The chantin of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was
heard respectfully conratulatin the dyin man on havin received the
sacrament. The dyin man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
him everyone bean to stir: steps were audible and whispers, amon which
Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.

Pierre heard her say:

"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."

The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that
Pierre could no loner see the reddish-yellow face with its ray mane--
which, thouh he saw other faces as well, he had not lost siht of for a
sinle moment durin the whole service. He juded by the cautious
movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had
lifted the dyin man and were movin him.

"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants
say in a frihtened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"
exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathin of the bearers and
the shufflin of their feet rew more hurried, as if the weiht they
were carryin were too much for them.

As the bearers, amon whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the youn man he
cauht a momentary limpse between their heads and backs of the dyin
man's hih, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
those who were holdin him under the armpits, and of his ray, curly,
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was not
disfiured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
Petersbur. But now this head was swayin helplessly with the uneven
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless aze fixed itself upon
nothin.

After a few minutes' bustle beside the hih bedstead, those who had
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick man
had been laid in a stately pose in keepin with the ceremony just
completed. He lay with his head propped hih on the pillows. His hands
were symmetrically placed on the reen silk quilt, the palms downward.
When Pierre came up the count was azin straiht at him, but with a
look the sinificance of which could not be understood by mortal man.
Either this look meant nothin but that as lon as one has eyes they
must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowin
what to do, and lanced inquirinly at his uide. Anna Mikhaylovna made
a hurried sin with her eyes, lancin at the sick man's hand and movin
her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretchin his neck
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suestion and pressed his
lips to the lare boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a sinle
muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked
questioninly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna
Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.
Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes askin if he were doin riht. Anna
Mikhaylovna nodded approvinly. Aain Pierre fell into the naively
symmetrical pose of an Eyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doin his utmost to look
as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still azed at the
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
of these last moments of meetin between the father and son. This lasted
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
muscles and lines of the count's face bean to twitch. The twitchin
increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre
realize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth
issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively
at the sick man's eyes, tryin to uess what he wanted; she pointed
first to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an
inquirin whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the
sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
stood constantly at the head of the bed.

"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and ot up to
turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.

Pierre rose to help him.

While the count was bein turned over, one of his arms fell back
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre rearded that lifeless arm,
or whether some other thouht flitted across his dyin brain, at any
rate he lanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,
and aain at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,
quite out of keepin with his features, that seemed to deride his own
helplessness. At siht of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quiverin
in his breast and a ticklin in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The
sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sihed.

"He is dozin," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observin that one of the
princesses was comin to take her turn at watchin. "Let us o."

Pierre went out.




CHAPTER XXIV

There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the
eldest princess, who were sittin under the portrait of Catherine the
reat and talkin eaerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
they became silent, and Pierre thouht he saw the princess hide
somethin as she whispered:

"I can't bear the siht of that woman."

"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawin room," said Prince
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "o and take somethin, my poor Anna
Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."

To Pierre he said nothin, merely ivin his arm a sympathetic squeeze
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small
drawin room.

"There is nothin so refreshin after a sleepless niht as a cup of this
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was sayin with an air of restrained
animation as he stood sippin tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cup
before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
circular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
that niht had athered to fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered
this small circular drawin room with its mirrors and little tables.
Durin balls iven at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
had liked sittin in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
throuh in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lihted mirrors which
repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
lihted by two candles. On one small table tea thins and supper dishes
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the niht a motley thron of
people sat there, not merrymakin, but somberly whisperin, and
betrayin by every word and movement that they none of them forot what
was happenin and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did
not eat anythin thouh he would very much have liked to. He looked
inquirinly at his monitress and saw that she was aain oin on tiptoe
to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest
princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standin beside the
princess, and they were both speakin in excited whispers.

"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not
necessary," said the youner of the two speakers, evidently in the same
state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.

"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but
impressively, blockin the way to the bedroom and preventin the other
from passin, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he
needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
prepared..."

Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with
one le crossed hih above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby
that they looked heavier below, were twitchin violently; but he wore
the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were sayin.

"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know
how fond the count is of her."

"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the youner of the two
ladies, addressin Prince Vasili and pointin to an inlaid portfolio she
held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writin
table, and this is a paper he has forotten...."

She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter spran so as to bar
her path.

"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizin the
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let o easily. "Dear
princess, I be and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en
conjure..."

The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the strule for the
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if the
princess did speak, her words would not be flatterin to Anna
Mikhaylovna. Thouh the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
of its honeyed firmness and softness.

"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"

"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud
that those in the drawin room heard her and were startled. "Why do you
remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, makin
a scene on the very threshold of a dyin man's room? Intriuer!" she
hissed viciously, and tued with all her miht at the portfolio.

But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the
portfolio, and chaned her rip.

Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is
absurd! Come, let o I tell you."

The princess let o.

"And you too!"

But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.

"Let o, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will o
and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"

"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,
allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said
she, turnin to the youn man who, havin come quite close, was azin
with astonishment at the anry face of the princess which had lost all
dinity, and at the twitchin cheeks of Prince Vasili.

"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili
severely. "You don't know what you are doin."

"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, dartin unexpectedly at Anna
Mikhaylovna and snatchin the portfolio from her.

Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.

At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so lon and
which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and baned
aainst the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
wrinin her hands.

"What are you doin!" she cried vehemently. "He is dyin and you leave
me alone with him!"

Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stoopin, quickly
cauht up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
princess and Prince Vasili, recoverin themselves, followed her. A few
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, aain
bitin her underlip. At siht of Pierre her expression showed an
irrepressible hatred.

"Yes, now you may be lad!" said she; "this is what you have been
waitin for." And burstin into tears she hid her face in her
handkerchief and rushed from the room.

Prince Vasili came next. He staered to the sofa on which Pierre was
sittin and dropped onto it, coverin his face with his hand. Pierre
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
aue.

"Ah, my friend!" said he, takin Pierre by the elbow; and there was in
his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
awful..." and he burst into tears.

Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet
steps.

"Pierre!" she said.

Pierre ave her an inquirin look. She kissed the youn man on his
forehead, wettin him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:

"He is no more...."

Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.

"Come, I will o with you. Try to weep, nothin ives such relief as
tears."

She led him into the dark drawin room and Pierre was lad no one could
see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was
fast asleep with his head on his arm.

In the mornin Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:

"Yes, my dear, this is a reat loss for us all, not to speak of you. But
od will support you: you are youn, and are now, I hope, in command of
an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well
enouh to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
duties on you, and you must be a man."

Pierre was silent.

"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been
there, od only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
me only the day before yesterday not to foret Boris. But he had no
time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"

Pierre understood nothin of all this and colorin shyly looked in
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On wakin in the
mornin she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herself
wish to die, that his end was not only touchin but edifyin. As to the
last meetin between father and son, it was so touchin that she could
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
durin those awful moments--the father who so remembered everythin and
everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with rief,
thouh he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dyin father.
"It is painful, but it does one ood. It uplifts the soul to see such
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovinly, but in
whispers and as a reat secret.




CHAPTER XXV

At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the
arrival of youn Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but this
expectation did not upset the reular routine of life in the old
prince's household. eneral in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
(nicknamed in society, "the Kin of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
with his dauhter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Thouh in the new rein he was free to return to the
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarkin that
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothin. He used to say
that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intellience. He
himself undertook his dauhter's education, and to develop these two
cardinal virtues in her ave her lessons in alebra and eometry till
she was twenty, and arraned her life so that her whole time was
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writin his memoirs, solvin
problems in hiher mathematics, turnin snuffboxes on a lathe, workin
in the arden, or superintendin the buildin that was always oin on
at his estate. As reularity is a prime condition facilitatin activity,
reularity in his household was carried to the hihest point of
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
him, from his dauhter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
exactin, so that without bein a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Althouh he was
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every hih
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
just as the architect, ardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sittin in this
antechamber experienced the same feelin of respect and even fear when
the enormously hih study door opened and showed the fiure of a rather
small old man, with powdered wi, small withered hands, and bushy ray
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the leam of his shrewd,
youthfully litterin eyes.

On the mornin of the day that the youn couple were to arrive, Princess
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
mornin reetin, crossin herself with trepidation and repeatin a
silent prayer. Every mornin she came in like that, and every mornin
prayed that the daily interview miht pass off well.

An old powdered manservant who was sittin in the antechamber rose
quietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."

Throuh the door came the reular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
entrance. The prince was workin at the lathe and after lancin round
continued his work.

The enormous study was full of thins evidently in constant use. The
lare table covered with books and plans, the tall lass-fronted
bookcases with keys in the locks, the hih desk for writin while
standin up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
tools laid ready to hand and shavins scattered around--all indicated
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure of
the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
tenacious endurance and vior of hardy old ae. After a few more turns
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approachin
the table, summoned his dauhter. He never ave his children a blessin,
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, reardin
her tenderly and attentively, said severely:

"Quite well? All riht then, sit down." He took the exercise book
containin lessons in eometry written by himself and drew up a chair
with his foot.

"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly findin the pae and makin a scratch
from one pararaph to another with his hard nail.

The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.

"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, takin
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a ba hanin above the table,
onto which he threw it.

At the siht of the letter red patches showed themselves on the
princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.

"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still
sound, yellowish teeth.

"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid lance and a
timid smile.

"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
third!"

"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushin still more
and holdin out the letter.

"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushin the
letter away, and leanin his elbows on the table he drew toward him the
exercise book containin eometrical fiures.

"Well, madam," he bean, stoopin over the book close to his dauhter
and placin an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that
she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old ae
and tobacco, which she had known so lon. "Now, madam, these trianles
are equal; please note that the anle ABC..."

The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes litterin
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
plain that she understood nothin and was so frihtened that her fear
would prevent her understandin any of her father's further
explanations, however clear they miht be. Whether it was the teacher's
fault or the pupil's, this same thin happened every day: the princess'
eyes rew dim, she could not see and could not hear anythin, but was
only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his
breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to et away
quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old man
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sittin noisily
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
flun the exercise book away.

The princess ave a wron answer.

"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushin the book aside
and turnin sharply away; but risin immediately, he paced up and down,
lihtly touched his dauhter's hair and sat down aain.

He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.

"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,
havin taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
to have you like our silly ladies. et used to it and you'll like it,"
and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of your
head."

She turned to o, but he stopped her with a esture and took an uncut
book from the hih desk.

"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent
you. Reliious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked
at it. Take it. Well, now o. o."

He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.

Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
sat down at her writin table, on which stood miniature portraits and
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
her father was tidy. She put down the eometry book and eaerly broke
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
childhood; that same Julie Karaina who had been at the Rostovs' name-
day party.

Julie wrote in French:

Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frihtful a thin is
separation! Thouh I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separatin us
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels aainst
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we
parted. Why are we not toether as we were last summer, in your bi
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
three months ao, draw fresh moral strenth from your look, so entle,
calm, and penetratin, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
as I write?

Havin read thus far, Princess Mary sihed and lanced into the mirror
which stood on her riht. It reflected a weak, unraceful fiure and
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
at her reflection in the lass. "She flatters me," thouht the princess,
turnin away and continuin to read. But Julie did not flatter her
friend, the princess' eyes--lare, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
times there radiated from them shafts of warm liht)--were so beautiful
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they ave her an
attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never saw
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she was
not thinkin of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a lass. She went on
readin:

All Moscow talks of nothin but war. One of my two brothers is already
abroad, the other is with the uards, who are startin on their march to
the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersbur and it is thouht
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. od rant
that the Corsican monster who is destroyin the peace of Europe may be
overthrown by the anel whom it has pleased the Almihty, in His
oodness, to ive us as soverein! To say nothin of my brothers, this
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
youn Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the
army was a reat rief to me. This youn man, of whom I spoke to you
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
one seldom finds nowadays amon our old men of twenty and, particularly,
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that my
relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
Someday I will tell you about our partin and all that was said then.
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
these poinant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
enerally the stroner! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
youn ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enouh of
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow ossips, is the death of
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothin, and it is Monsieur
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
reconized as leitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor
of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersbur
quite crestfallen.

I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and
inheritance; but I do know that since this youn man, whom we all used
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
owner of one of the larest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
watch the chane in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
marriaeable dauhters, and of the youn ladies themselves, toward him,
thouh, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort of
fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves by
findin husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
matchmakin chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A
propos of marriaes: do you know that a while ao that universal auntie
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
marriae for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's
son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marryin him to someone rich
and distinuee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.
I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to let
you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
scaperace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.

But enouh of ossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and
Mamma has sent for me to o and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
mystical book I am sendin you; it has an enormous success here. Thouh
there are thins in it difficult for the feeble human mind to rasp, it
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! ive my
respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.

JULIE

P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charmin little wife.

The princess pondered awhile with a thouhtful smile and her luminous
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
also in French:

Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has iven me reat
deliht. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if we
had not reliion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that youn
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
feelins in others, and if never havin felt them I cannot approve of
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
love, love of one's neihbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,
and better than the feelins which the beautiful eyes of a youn man can
inspire in a romantic and lovin youn irl like yourself.

The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and my
father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
representative but one of the reat century, and that it is his own turn
now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
possible. od preserve us from that terrible misfortune!

I cannot aree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to o throuh the eye of
a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kindom of od, are terribly
true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So youn,
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
than the poorest bear. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you
tell me that amon some ood thins it contains others which our weak
human understandin cannot rasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend
time in readin what is unintelliible and can therefore bear no fruit.
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusin
their minds by dwellin on mystical books that merely awaken their
doubts and excite their imaination, ivin them a bent for exaeration
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles
and ospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;
for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and
holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms an
impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confine
ourselves to studyin those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has
left for our uidance here below. Let us try to conform to them and
follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble
human minds roam, the better we shall please od, who rejects all
knowlede that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom
what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He
vouchsafe its revelation to us throuh His divine Spirit.

My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he
has received a letter and is expectin a visit from Prince Vasili. In
reard to this project of marriae for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
friend, that I look on marriae as a divine institution to which we must
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almihty lay the
duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
faithfully as I can, without disquietin myself by examinin my feelins
toward him whom He may ive me for husband.

I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival at
Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
however, for he will leave us aain to take part in this unhappy war
into which we have been drawn, od knows how or why. Not only where you
are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of war,
even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolk
consider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard and
painfully felt. My father talks of nothin but marches and
countermarches, thins of which I understand nothin; and the day before
yesterday durin my daily walk throuh the villae I witnessed a
heartrendin scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
people and startin to join the army. You should have seen the state of
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were oin and should
have heard the sobs. It seems as thouh mankind has forotten the laws
of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and foriveness of injuries--
and that men attribute the reatest merit to skill in killin one
another.

Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy
Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!

MARY

"Ah, you are sendin off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched
mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smilin Mademoiselle
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with uttural r's.
She brouht into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and loomy world a
quite different atmosphere, careless, lihthearted, and self-satisfied.

"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowerin her voice and evidently
listenin to herself with pleasure, and speakin with exaerated
rasseyement, "the prince has been scoldin Michael Ivanovich. He is in
a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."

"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to jude him
and would not have others do so."

The princess lanced at her watch and, seein that she was five minutes
late in startin her practice on the clavichord, went into the sittin
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the day
was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
clavichord.




CHAPTER XXVI

The ray-haired valet was sittin drowsily listenin to the snorin of
the prince, who was in his lare study. From the far side of the house
throuh the closed doors came the sound of difficult passaes--twenty
times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.

Just then a closed carriae and another with a hood drove up to the
porch. Prince Andrew ot out of the carriae, helped his little wife to
aliht, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearin
a wi, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in a
whisper that the prince was sleepin, and hastily closed the door.
Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
ascertain whether his father's habits had chaned since he was at home
last, and, havin assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
wife.

"He will et up in twenty minutes. Let us o across to Mary's room," he
said.

The little princess had rown stouter durin this time, but her eyes and
her short, downy, smilin lip lifted when she bean to speak just as
merrily and prettily as ever.

"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, lookin around with
the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's
come, quick, quick!" And with a lance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at
her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.

"Is that Mary practicin? Let's o quietly and take her by surprise."

Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.

"You've rown older, Tikhon," he said in passin to the old man, who
kissed his hand.

Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
rushed out apparently beside herself with deliht.

"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her
know."

"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little
princess, kissin her. "I know you already throuh my sister-in-law's
friendship for you. She was not expectin us?"

They went up to the door of the sittin room from which came the sound
of the oft-repeated passae of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
made a rimace, as if expectin somethin unpleasant.

The little princess entered the room. The passae broke off in the
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
of kissin. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only
met once before for a short time at his weddin, were in each other's
arms warmly pressin their lips to whatever place they happened to
touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressin her hand to her
heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to
lauh. Prince Andrew shrued his shoulders and frowned, as lovers of
music do when they hear a false note. The two women let o of one
another, and then, as if afraid of bein too late, seized each other's
hands, kissin them and pullin them away, and aain bean kissin each
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both bean to
cry and kissed aain. Mademoiselle Bourienne also bean to cry. Prince
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
heads that it could have been otherwise at this meetin.

"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then lauhed.
"I dreamed last niht..."--"You were not expectin us?..." "Ah! Mary,
you have ot thinner?..." "And you have rown stouter!..."

"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not
see you."

Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and he
told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
turned toward her brother, and throuh her tears the lovin, warm,
entle look of her lare luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
rested on Prince Andrew's face.

The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip
continually and rapidly touchin her rosy nether lip when necessary and
drawin up aain next moment when her face broke into a smile of
litterin teeth and sparklin eyes. She told of an accident they had
had on the Spasski Hill which miht have been serious for her in her
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
all her clothes in Petersbur and that heaven knew what she would have
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite chaned, and that Kitty
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
still lookin silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was followin a train of
thouht independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a
description of the last Petersbur fete she addressed her brother:

"So you are really oin to the war, Andrew?" she said sihin.

Lise sihed too.

"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.

"He is leavin me here, od knows why, when he miht have had
promotion..."

Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuin her train of
thouht turned to her sister-in-law with a tender lance at her fiure.

"Is it certain?" she said.

The face of the little princess chaned. She sihed and said: "Yes,
quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."

Her lip descended. She brouht her face close to her sister-in-law's and
unexpectedly aain bean to cry.

"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?
Take her to your room and I'll o to Father. How is he? Just the same?"

"Yes, just the same. Thouh I don't know what your opinion will be,"
answered the princess joyfully.

"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the
lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
aware of his weaknesses.

"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my
eometry lessons," said Princess Mary leefully, as if her lessons in
eometry were amon the reatest delihts of her life.

When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old
prince to et up, Tikhon came to call the youn prince to his father.
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
son's arrival: he ave orders to admit him to his apartments while he
dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
style, wearin an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
entered his father's dressin room (not with the contemptuous look and
manner he wore in drawin rooms, but with the animated face with which
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sittin on a lare leather-covered
chair, wrapped in a powderin mantle, entrustin his head to Tikhon.

"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old
man, shakin his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
holdin fast to plait, would allow.

"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he oes on like this
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
his cheek.

The old man was in a ood temper after his nap before dinner. (He used
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, olden.") He
cast happy, sidelon lances at his son from under his thick, bushy
eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot
indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite topic--
makin fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly of
Bonaparte.

"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brouht my wife who is prenant,"
said Prince Andrew, followin every movement of his father's face with
an eaer and respectful look. "How is your health?"

"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from
mornin till niht and abstemious, so of course I am well."

"Thank od," said his son smilin.

"od has nothin to do with it! Well, o on," he continued, returnin to
his hobby; "tell me how the ermans have tauht you to fiht Bonaparte
by this new science you call 'stratey.'"

Prince Andrew smiled.

"ive me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that
showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from lovin and
honorin him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"

"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shakin his pitail to see
whether it was firmly plaited, and raspin his by the hand. "The house
for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way!
I am lad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army I
understand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What about
Austria?" said he, risin from his chair and pacin up and down the room
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handin him different articles of
clothin. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"

Prince Andrew, seein that his father insisted, bean--at first
reluctantly, but radually with more and more animation, and from habit
chanin unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
the plan of operation for the comin campain. He explained how an army,
ninety thousand stron, was to threaten Prussia so as to brin her out
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many Enlish
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
not evince the least interest durin this explanation, but as if he were
not listenin to it continued to dress while walkin about, and three
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shoutin: "The
white one, the white one!"

This meant that Tikhon was not handin him the waistcoat he wanted.
Another time he interrupted, sayin:

"And will she soon be confined?" and shakin his head reproachfully
said: "That's bad! o on, o on."

The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishin his
description. The old man bean to sin, in the cracked voice of old ae:
"Malbrook s'en va-t-en uerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *


* "Marlborouh is oin to the wars; od knows when he'll return."

His son only smiled.

"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only tellin
you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than
this one."

"Well, you've told me nothin new," and the old man repeated,
meditatively and rapidly:

"Dieu sait quand reviendra. o to the dinin room."




CHAPTER XXVII

At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
dinin room where his dauhter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
Bourienne were already awaitin him toether with his architect, who by
a strane caprice of his employer's was admitted to table thouh the
position of that insinificant individual was such as could certainly
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who enerally kept
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
overnment officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
Ivanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked
handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and had
more than once impressed on his dauhter that Michael Ivanovich was "not
a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.

In the dinin room, which like all the rooms in the house was
exceedinly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
behind each chair--stood waitin for the prince to enter. The head
butler, napkin on arm, was scannin the settin of the table, makin
sins to the footmen, and anxiously lancin from the clock to the door
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was lookin at a lare
ilt frame, new to him, containin the enealoical tree of the Princes
Bolkonski, opposite which hun another such frame with a badly painted
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonin to the estate)
of a rulin prince, in a crown--an alleed descendant of Rurik and
ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, lookin aain at that
enealoical tree, shook his head, lauhin as a man lauhs who looks at
a portrait so characteristic of the oriinal as to be amusin.

"How thorouhly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had
come up to him.

Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
what he was lauhin at. Everythin her father did inspired her with
reverence and was beyond question.

"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with
his powerful mind, indulin in such nonsense!"

Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
comin from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
his wont, as if intentionally contrastin the briskness of his manners
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the reat clock
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawin
room. The prince stood still; his lively litterin eyes from under
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
her neck.

"I'm lad, lad, to see you," he said, lookin attentively into her
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit
down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"

He indicated a place beside him to his dauhter-in-law. A footman moved
the chair for her.

"Ho, ho!" said the old man, castin his eyes on her rounded fiure.
"You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"

He lauhed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
and not with his eyes.

"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.

The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
she bean to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
she became still more animated and chattered away ivin him reetins
from various people and retellin the town ossip.

"Countess Apraksina, poor thin, has lost her husband and she has cried
her eyes out," she said, rowin more and more lively.

As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.

"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be havin a bad time of it.
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been tellin me
what forces are bein collected aainst him! While you and I never
thouht much of him."

Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such
thins about Bonaparte, but understandin that he was wanted as a pe on
which to han the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquirinly at the
youn prince, wonderin what would follow.

"He is a reat tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointin to the
architect.

And the conversation aain turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the
enerals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A
B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insinificant
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no loner any
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but only
a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playin,
pretendin to do somethin real. Prince Andrew aily bore with his
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
with evident pleasure.

"The past always seems ood," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fall
into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to
escape?"

"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly cauht. "Suvorov!... Consider,
Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
Hofs-kries-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled the
devil himself! When you et there you'll find out what those Hofs-
kries-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manae them so what chance has
Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your enerals
won't et on aainst Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the French, so
that birds of a feather may fiht toether. The erman, Pahlen, has been
sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman, Moreau," he said,
alludin to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian
service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs
ermans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your wits, or I have
outlived mine. May od help you, but we'll see what will happen.
Buonaparte has become a reat commander amon them! Hm!..."

"I don't at all say that all the plans are ood," said Prince Andrew, "I
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may lauh as much as
you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a reat eneral!"

"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forotten: "Didn't I tell you
Buonaparte was a reat tactician? Here, he says the same thin."

"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.

The prince aain lauhed his friid lauh.

"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has ot
splendid soldiers. Besides he bean by attackin ermans. And only
idlers have failed to beat the ermans. Since the world bean everybody
has beaten the ermans. They beat no one--except one another. He made
his reputation fihtin them."

And the prince bean explainin all the blunders which, accordin to
him, Bonaparte had made in his campains and even in politics. His son
made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever aruments were
presented he was as little able as his father to chane his opinion. He
listened, refrainin from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
old man, livin alone in the country for so many years, could know and
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
political events.

"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of
affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep at
niht. Come now, where has this reat commander of yours shown his
skill?" he concluded.

"That would take too lon to tell," answered the son.

"Well, then o to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
excellent French.

"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"

"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a
lauh still more so, he quitted the table.

The little princess durin the whole discussion and the rest of the
dinner sat silent, lancin with a frihtened look now at her father-in-
law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she took her
sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.

"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am
afraid of him."

"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Prince Andrew was to leave next evenin. The old prince, not alterin
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in
her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a travelin coat without
epaulettes had been packin with his valet in the rooms assined to him.
After inspectin the carriae himself and seein the trunks put in, he
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those thins he always kept
with him remained in his room; a small box, a lare canteen fitted with
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his father
who had brouht it from the siee of Ochakov. All these travelin
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very ood order: new, clean, and in
cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.

When startin on a journey or chanin their mode of life, men capable
of reflection are enerally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
looked very thouhtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
briskly from corner to corner of the room, lookin straiht before him
and thouhtfully shakin his head. Did he fear oin to the war, or was
he sad at leavin his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not wish
to be seen in that mood, for hearin footsteps in the passae he
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tyin the cover
of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.

"I hear you have iven orders to harness," she cried, pantin (she had
apparently been runnin), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
you alone! od knows how lon we may aain be parted. You are not anry
with me for comin? You have chaned so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
explain such a question.

She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously
strane to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha-
-the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood.

"And where is Lise?" he asked, answerin her question only by a smile.

"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sittin down on
the sofa, facin her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry
child. I have rown so fond of her."

Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.

"One must be indulent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,
Andrew? Don't foret that she has rown up and been educated in society,
and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think
what it must be for her, poor thin, after what she has been used to, to
be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
condition! It's very hard."


* To understand all is to forive all.

Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
think we thorouhly understand.

"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.

"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,
and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a youn society
woman to be buried in the country durin the best years of her life, all
alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poor
resources I have for entertainin a woman used to the best society.
There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."

"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.

"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.
She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
even in my way. You know I always was a savae, and now am even more so.
I like bein alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always entle and kind,
because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't
love people so much for the ood they have done us, as for the ood we
have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losin her
own father. She is very ood-natured, and my father likes her way of
readin. She reads to him in the evenins and reads splendidly."

"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes
thins tryin for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.

Princess Mary was first surprised and then ahast at this question.

"For me? For me?... Tryin for me!..." said she.

"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's ettin very
tryin," said Prince Andrew, apparently speakin lihtly of their father
in order to puzzle or test his sister.

"You are ood in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual
pride," said the princess, followin the train of her own thouhts
rather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a reat sin. How
can one jude Father? But even if one miht, what feelin except
veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."

Her brother shook his head incredulously.

"The only thin that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,
Andrew... is Father's way of treatin reliious subjects. I don't
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as
clear as day, and can o so far astray. That is the only thin that
makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
monk he received and had a lon talk with."

"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wastin your powder,"
said Prince Andrew banterinly yet tenderly.

"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that od will hear me. Andrew..."
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a reat favor to ask
of you."

"What is it, dear?"

"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will ive you no trouble and
is nothin unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
Andrusha!..." said she, puttin her hand in her reticule but not yet
takin out what she was holdin inside it, as if what she held were the
subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
ranted.

She looked timidly at her brother.

"Even if it were a reat deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as
if uessin what it was about.

"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as you
please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
randfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out what
she was holdin in her reticule.) "So you promise?"

"Of course. What is it?"

"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will
never take it off. Do you promise?"

"If it does not weih a hundredweiht and won't break my neck... To
please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticin the pained
expression his joke had brouht to his sister's face, he repented and
added: "I am lad; really, dear, I am very lad."

"Aainst your will He will save and have mercy on you and brin you to
Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice
tremblin with emotion, solemnly holdin up in both hands before her
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a old
settin, on a finely wrouht silver chain.

She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.

"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."

Rays of entle liht shone from her lare, timid eyes. Those eyes lit up
the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for
he was touched, but also a leam of irony on his face.

"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down aain
on the sofa. They were silent for a while.

"As I was sayin to you, Andrew, be kind and enerous as you always used
to be. Don't jude Lise harshly," she bean. "She is so sweet, so ood-
natured, and her position now is a very hard one."

"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed
her. Why do you say all this to me?"

Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if
she felt uilty.

"I have said nothin to you, but you have already been talked to. And I
am sorry for that," he went on.

The patches rew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to
say somethin but could not. Her brother had uessed riht: the little
princess had been cryin after dinner and had spoken of her forebodins
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After cryin she had fallen
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.

"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never
shall reproach my wife with anythin, and I cannot reproach myself with
anythin in reard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
is so I don't know..."

As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stoopin, kissed her
forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thouhtful, kindly, and
unaccustomed brihtness, but he was lookin not at his sister but over
her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.

"Let us o to her, I must say ood-by. Or--o and wake and I'll come in
a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these
away. Put this on the seat and this to the riht."

Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to od and asked Him to
ive you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
answered."

"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "o, Masha; I'll come immediately."

On the way to his sister's room, in the passae which connected one win
with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smilin
sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
artless smile, she had met him in secluded passaes.

"Oh! I thouht you were in your room," she said, for some reason
blushin and droppin her eyes.

Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of aner suddenly
came over his face. He said nothin to her but looked at her forehead
and hair, without lookin at her eyes, with such contempt that the
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
sister's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurryin
one word after another, came throuh the open door. She was speakin as
usual in French, and as if after lon self-restraint she wished to make
up for lost time.

"No, but imaine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth
full of false teeth, as if she were tryin to cheat old ae.... Ha, ha,
ha! Mary!"

This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same lauh Prince
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and
rosy, was sittin in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talkin
incessantly, repeatin Petersbur reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.

The coach with six horses was waitin at the porch. It was an autumn
niht, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriae pole.
Servants with lanterns were bustlin about in the porch. The immense
house was brilliant with lihts shinin throuh its lofty windows. The
domestic serfs were crowdin in the hall, waitin to bid ood-by to the
youn prince. The members of the household were all athered in the
reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
father's study as the latter wished to say ood-by to him alone. All
were waitin for them to come out.

When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-ae
spectacles and white dressin own, in which he received no one but his
son, sat at the table writin. He lanced round.

"oin?" And he went on writin.

"I've come to say ood-by."

"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"

"What do you thank me for?"

"For not dilly-dallyin and not hanin to a woman's apron strins. The
Service before everythin. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writin, so
that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anythin to say,
say it. These two thins can be done toether," he added.

"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands..."

"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."

"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let
him be here...."

The old prince stopped writin and, as if not understandin, fixed his
stern eyes on his son.

"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases
only one oes wron, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
tellin her thins. She has had a dream and is frihtened."

"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishin what he was
writin. "I'll do it."

He sined with a flourish and suddenly turnin to his son bean to
lauh.

"It's a bad business, eh?"

"What is bad, Father?"

"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and sinificantly.

"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.

"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that;
one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know it
yourself."

He seized his son by the hand with small bony finers, shook it, looked
straiht into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see throuh
him, and aain lauhed his friid lauh.

The son sihed, thus admittin that his father had understood him. The
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatchin up and throwin
down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.

"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everythin. Make your mind
easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealin his letter.

Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father
understood him. The old man ot up and ave the letter to his son.

"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shall
be. Now listen! ive this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I have
written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you
lon as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.
Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all riht--serve him.
Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is in
disfavor. Now come here."


*Kutuzov.

He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
bold, tall, close handwritin.

"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and
a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's
wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottins for you to read
when I am one. You will find them useful."

Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a lon time
yet. He felt that he must not say it.

"I will do it all, Father," he said.

"Well, now, ood-by!" He ave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced
him. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like a
son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"

"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.

The old man was silent.

"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed and
if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I said
yesterday... let him row up with you.... Please."

"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and lauhed.

They stood silent, facin one another. The old man's sharp eyes were
fixed straiht on his son's. Somethin twitched in the lower part of the
old prince's face.

"We've said ood-by. o!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, anry voice,
openin his door.

"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at
the door Prince Andrew and the fiure of the old man in a white dressin
own, spectacled and wiless, shoutin in an anry voice.

Prince Andrew sihed and made no reply.

"Well!" he said, turnin to his wife.

And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were sayin,: "Now o
throuh your performance."

"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turnin pale and lookin
with dismay at her husband.

He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.

He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,
and carefully placed her in an easy chair.

"Adieu, Mary," said he ently to his sister, takin her by the hand and
kissin her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.

The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafin
her temples. Princess Mary, supportin her sister-in-law, still looked
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door throuh which Prince
Andrew had one and made the sin of the cross in his direction. From
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
anrily blowin his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew one when the study
door opened quickly and the stern fiure of the old man in the white
dressin own looked out.

"one? That's all riht!" said he; and lookin anrily at the
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovinly and slammed
the door.

BOOK TWO: 1805




CHAPTER I

In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupyin the villaes and towns of
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other reiments freshly arrivin from
Russia were settlin near the fortress of Braunau and burdenin the
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.

On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry reiments that had just reached
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waitin to be inspected by
the commander-in-chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
locality and surroundins--fruit ardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, and
hills in the distance--and despite the fact that the inhabitants (who
azed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the reiment
had just the appearance of any Russian reiment preparin for an
inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.

On the evenin of the last day's march an order had been received that
the commander-in-chief would inspect the reiment on the march. Thouh
the words of the order were not clear to the reimental commander, and
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marchin order or
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
to present the reiment in parade order, on the principle that it is
always better to "bow too low than not bow low enouh." So the soldiers,
after a twenty-mile march, were kept mendin and cleanin all niht lon
without closin their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanders
calculated and reckoned, and by mornin the reiment--instead of the
stralin, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day
before--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom
knew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,
and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally was all in order,
but had it pleased the commander-in-chief to look under the uniforms he
would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack the
appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say.
There was only one circumstance concernin which no one could be at
ease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's
boots were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of the
reimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not
been issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the reiment had marched
some seven hundred miles.

The commander of the reiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and
thick-set eneral with rizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform
showin the creases where it had been folded and thick old epaulettes
which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He
had the air of a man happily performin one of the most solemn duties of
his life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
himself up, slihtly archin his back. It was plain that the commander
admired his reiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
enrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
thouhts.

"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressin one of the battalion
commanders who smilinly pressed forward (it was plain that they both
felt happy). "We had our hands full last niht. However, I think the
reiment is not a bad one, eh?"

The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and lauhed.

"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."

"What?" asked the commander.

At that moment, on the road from the town on which sinalers had been
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
followed by a Cossack.

The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander-in-chief
wished to see the reiment just in the state in which it had been on the
march: in their reatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
whatever.

A member of the Hofkriesrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army of
the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considerin this
junction advisable, meant, amon other aruments in support of his view,
to show the Austrian eneral the wretched state in which the troops
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the reiment;
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander-
in-chief would be. Thouh the aide-de-camp did not know these
circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the men
should be in their reatcoats and in marchin order, and that the
commander-in-chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearin this the
reimental commander hun his head, silently shrued his shoulders, and
spread out his arms with a choleric esture.

"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.

"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said 'on
the march' it meant in reatcoats?" said he reproachfully to the
battalion commander. "Oh, my od!" he added, steppin resolutely
forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to
command. "Sereants major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked the
aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relatin to the
personae he was referrin to.

"In an hour's time, I should say."

"Shall we have time to chane clothes?"

"I don't know, eneral...."

The reimental commander, oin up to the line himself, ordered the
soldiers to chane into their reatcoats. The company commanders ran off
to their companies, the sereants major bean bustlin (the reatcoats
were not in very ood condition), and instantly the squares that had up
to then been in reular order and silent bean to sway and stretch and
hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were runnin to and fro, throwin
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pullin the straps
over their heads, unstrappin their overcoats and drawin the sleeves on
with upraised arms.

In half an hour all was aain in order, only the squares had become ray
instead of black. The reimental commander walked with his jerky steps
to the front of the reiment and examined it from a distance.

"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the
third company!"

"Commander of the third company wanted by the eneral!... commander to
the eneral... third company to the commander." The words passed alon
the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missin officer.

When the eaer but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a
cry of: "The eneral to the third company," the missin officer appeared
from behind his company and, thouh he was a middle-aed man and not in
the habit of runnin, trotted awkwardly stumblin on his toes toward the
eneral. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is
told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose,
the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth
twitched nervously. The eneral looked the captain up and down as he
came up pantin, slackenin his pace as he approached.

"You will soon be dressin your men in petticoats! What is this?"
shouted the reimental commander, thrustin forward his jaw and pointin
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a reatcoat of bluish
cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been after? The
commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach
you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"

The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,
pressed two finers more and more riidly to his cap, as if in this
pressure lay his only hope of salvation.

"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you ot there dressed up as a
Hunarian?" said the commander with an austere ibe.

"Your excellency..."

"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your
excellency?... nobody knows."

"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to the
ranks," said the captain softly.

"Well? Has he been deraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If
a soldier, he should be dressed in reulation uniform like the others."

"Your excellency, you ave him leave yourself, on the march."

"ave him leave? Leave? That's just like you youn men," said the
reimental commander coolin down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says a
word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I be
you to dress your men decently."

And the commander, turnin to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
aner and walkin up to the reiment wished to find a further excuse for
wrath. Havin snapped at an officer for an unpolished bade, at another
because his line was not straiht, he reached the third company.

"H-o-o-w are you standin? Where's your le? Your le?" shouted the
commander with a tone of sufferin in his voice, while there were still
five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-ray uniform.

Dolokhov slowly straihtened his bent knee, lookin straiht with his
clear, insolent eyes in the eneral's face.

"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sereant major! Chane his coat... the
ras..." he did not finish.

"eneral, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov
hurriedly interrupted.

"No talkin in the ranks!... No talkin, no talkin!"

"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, rinin
tones.

The eyes of the eneral and the soldier met. The eneral became silent,
anrily pullin down his tiht scarf.

"I request you to have the oodness to chane your coat," he said as he
turned away.




CHAPTER II

"He's comin!" shouted the sinaler at that moment.

The reimental commander, flushin, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup
with tremblin hands, threw his body across the saddle, rihted himself,
drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, openin his
mouth awry, prepared to shout. The reiment fluttered like a bird
preenin its plumae and became motionless.

"Att-ention!" shouted the reimental commander in a soul-shakin voice
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the reiment, and welcome
for the approachin chief.

Alon the broad country road, eded on both sides by trees, came a hih,
liht blue Viennese caleche, slihtly creakin on its sprins and drawn
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche alloped the suite and
a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian eneral, in a white
uniform that looked strane amon the Russian black ones. The caleche
stopped in front of the reiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian eneral were
talkin in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slihtly as treadin heavily he
stepped down from the carriae just as if those two thousand men
breathlessly azin at him and the reimental commander did not exist.

The word of command ran out, and aain the reiment quivered, as with a
jinlin sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble
voice of the commander-in-chief was heard. The reiment roared, "Health
to your ex... len... len... lency!" and aain all became silent. At
first Kutuzov stood still while the reiment moved; then he and the
eneral in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the ranks.

From the way the reimental commander saluted the commander-in-chief and
devoured him with his eyes, drawin himself up obsequiously, and from
the way he walked throuh the ranks behind the enerals, bendin forward
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
darted forward at every word or esture of the commander-in-chief, it
was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
reater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
assiduity of its commander the reiment, in comparison with others that
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
were only 217 sick and stralers. Everythin was in ood order except
the boots.

Kutuzov walked throuh the ranks, sometimes stoppin to say a few
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
also to the soldiers. Lookin at their boots he several times shook his
head sadly, pointin them out to the Austrian eneral with an expression
which seemed to say that he was not blamin anyone, but could not help
noticin what a bad state of thins it was. The reimental commander ran
forward on each such occasion, fearin to miss a sinle word of the
commander-in-chief's reardin the reiment. Behind Kutuzov, at a
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
some twenty men of his suite. These entlemen talked amon themselves
and sometimes lauhed. Nearest of all to the commander-in-chief walked a
handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his comrade
Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,
smilin, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep from
lauhter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.
This hussar, with a rave face and without a smile or a chane in the
expression of his fixed eyes, watched the reimental commander's back
and mimicked his every movement. Each time the commander started and
bent forward, the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same
manner. Nesvitski lauhed and nuded the others to make them look at the
wa.

Kutuzov walked slowly and lanuidly past thousands of eyes which were
startin from their sockets to watch their chief. On reachin the third
company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not havin expected this,
involuntarily came closer to him.

"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, reconizin the red-nosed captain who had been
reprimanded on account of the blue reatcoat.

One would have thouht it impossible for a man to stretch himself more
than Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the reimental
commander, but now that the commander-in-chief addressed him he drew
himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
it had the commander-in-chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov,
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothin but ood,
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flittin over his
scarred and puffy face.

"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfied
with him?" he asked the reimental commander.

And the latter--unconscious that he was bein reflected in the hussar
officer as in a lookin lass--started, moved forward, and answered:
"Hihly satisfied, your excellency!"

"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smilin and walkin away from
him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."

The reimental commander was afraid he miht be blamed for this and did
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help lauhin. Kutuzov
turned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,
and while Kutuzov was turnin manaed to make a rimace and then assume
a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.

The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently tryin
to recollect somethin. Prince Andrew stepped forward from amon the
suite and said in French:

"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks
in this reiment."

"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.

Dolokhov, who had already chaned into a soldier's ray reatcoat, did
not wait to be called. The shapely fiure of the fair-haired soldier,
with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the
commander in chief, and presented arms.

"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a sliht frown.

"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.

"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty.
The Emperor is racious, and I shan't foret you if you deserve well."

The clear blue eyes looked at the commander-in-chief just as boldly as
they had looked at the reimental commander, seemin by their expression
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander-in-chief
so widely from a private.

"One thin I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,
rinin, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"

Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned
from Captain Timokhin aain flitted over his face. He turned away with a
rimace as if to say that everythin Dolokhov had said to him and
everythin he could say had lon been known to him, that he was weary of
it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to the
carriae.

The reiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
to rest after their hard marches.

"You won't bear me a rude, Prokhor Inatych?" said the reimental
commander, overtakin the third company on its way to its quarters and
ridin up to Captain Timokhin who was walkin in front. (The reimental
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
irrepressible deliht.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be
helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to
apoloize, you know me!... He was very pleased!" And he held out his
hand to the captain.

"Don't mention it, eneral, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain,
his nose rowin redder as he ave a smile which showed where two front
teeth were missin that had been knocked out by the butt end of a un at
Ismail.

"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't foret him--he may be quite easy.
And tell me, please--I've been meanin to ask--how is he behavin
himself, and in eneral..."

"As far as the service oes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;
but his character..." said Timokhin.

"And what about his character?" asked the reimental commander.

"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he is
sensible, well educated, and ood-natured, and the next he's a wild
beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."

"Oh, well, well!" remarked the reimental commander. "Still, one must
have pity on a youn man in misfortune. You know he has important
connections... Well, then, you just..."

"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showin by his smile that he
understood his commander's wish.

"Well, of course, of course!"

The reimental commander souht out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reinin
in his horse, said to him:

"After the next affair... epaulettes."

Dolokhov looked round but did not say anythin, nor did the mockin
smile on his lips chane.

"Well, that's all riht," continued the reimental commander. "A cup of
vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear. "I
thank you all! od be praised!" and he rode past that company and
overtook the next one.

"Well, he's really a ood fellow, one can serve under him," said
Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.

"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, lauhin (the
reimental commander was nicknamed Kin of Hearts).

The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the
soldiers. The company marched on aily. The soldiers' voices could be
heard on every side.

"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"

"And so he is! Quite blind!"

"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and le bands... he
noticed everythin..."

"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."

"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared
with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do
the uns."

"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to bein? You were
near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."

"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!
The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are puttin
them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte will
bein. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'd
better listen more carefully!"

"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turnin
into the villae already... they will have their buckwheat cooked before
we reach our quarters."

"ive me a biscuit, you devil!"

"And did you ive me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,
well, never mind, here you are."

"They miht call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles
without eatin."

"Wasn't it fine when those ermans ave us lifts! You just sit still and
are drawn alon."

"And here, friend, the people are quite bearly. There they all seemed
to be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're all reular
ermans."

"Siners to the front" came the captain's order.

And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A
drummer, their leader, turned round facin the siners, and flourishin
his arm, bean a lon-drawn-out soldiers' son, commencin with the
words: "Mornin dawned, the sun was risin," and concludin: "On then,
brothers, on to lory, led by Father Kamenski." This son had been
composed in the Turkish campain and now bein sun in Austria, the only
chane bein that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father
Kutuzov."

Havin jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms as
if flinin somethin to the round, the drummer--a lean, handsome
soldier of forty--looked sternly at the siners and screwed up his eyes.
Then havin satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised
both arms as if carefully liftin some invisible but precious object
above his head and, holdin it there for some seconds, suddenly flun it
down and bean:

"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"

"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player,
in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front and,
walkin backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and
flourished his castanets as if threatenin someone. The soldiers,
swinin their arms and keepin time spontaneously, marched with lon
steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creakin of sprins,
and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his suite were
returnin to the town. The commander-in-chief made a sin that the men
should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
pleasure at the sound of the sinin and the siht of the dancin
soldier and the ay and smartly marchin men. In the second file from
the riht flank, beside which the carriae passed the company, a blue-
eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov marchin
with particular race and boldness in time to the son and lookin at
those drivin past as if he pitied all who were not at that moment
marchin with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite who had
mimicked the reimental commander, fell back from the carriae and rode
up to Dolokhov.

Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersbur, beloned to the
wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private
and had not seen fit to reconize him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken
to the entleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old
friend.

"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he throuh the sinin, makin his
horse keep pace with the company.

"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."

The lively son ave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy
aiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
Dolokhov's reply.

"And how do you et on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.

"All riht. They are ood fellows. And how have you wriled onto the
staff?"

"I was attached; I'm on duty."

Both were silent.

"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide riht sleeve," went the son,
arousin an involuntary sensation of courae and cheerfulness. Their
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of
that son.

"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.

"The devil only knows! They say so."

"I'm lad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the son demanded.

"I say, come round some evenin and we'll have a ame of faro!" said
Zherkov.

"Why, have you too much money?"

"Do come."

"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I et
reinstated."

"Well, that's only till the first enaement."

"We shall see."

They were aain silent.

"Come if you need anythin. One can at least be of use on the staff..."

Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anythin, I won't be--I'll
take it!"

"Well, never mind; I only..."

"And I only..."

"ood-bye."

"ood health..."


"It's a lon, lon way. To my native land..."

Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot
to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, alloped past
the company, and overtook the carriae, still keepin time to the son.




CHAPTER III

On returnin from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian eneral into his
private room and, callin his adjutant, asked for some papers relatin
to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that
had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced
army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the required
papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriesrath were
sittin at the table on which a plan was spread out.

"Ah!..." said Kutuzov lancin at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he
was askin the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation in
French.

"All I can say, eneral," said he with a pleasant eleance of expression
and intonation that oblied one to listen to each deliberately spoken
word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his
own voice. "All I can say, eneral, is that if the matter depended on my
personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have
been fulfilled lon ao. I should lon ao have joined the archduke. And
believe me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure to
hand over the supreme command of the army into the hands of a better
informed and more skillful eneral--of whom Austria has so many--and to
lay down all this heavy responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes
too stron for us, eneral."

And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
but you have no rounds for tellin me so. And that is the whole point."

The Austrian eneral looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply
in the same tone.

"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and anry tone that
contrasted with his flatterin words, "on the contrary, your
excellency's participation in the common action is hihly valued by His
Majesty; but we think the present delay is deprivin the splendid
Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidently
prearraned sentence.

Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.

"But that is my conviction, and judin by the last letter with which
His Hihness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imaine that the
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as eneral
Mack, have by now already ained a decisive victory and no loner need
our aid," said Kutuzov.

The eneral frowned. Thouh there was no definite news of an Austrian
defeat, there were many circumstances confirmin the unfavorable rumors
that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suestion of an Austrian victory
sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smilin with the
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a riht to suppose so.
And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informed
him of a victory and stated strateically the position of the army was
very favorable.

"ive me that letter," said Kutuzov turnin to Prince Andrew. "Please
have a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners
of his mouth read to the Austrian eneral the followin passae, in
erman, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:

We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also, as
we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantae of
commandin both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not cross
the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line of
communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
intention should he try to direct his whole force aainst our faithful
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.

Kutuzov sihed deeply on finishin this pararaph and looked at the
member of the Hofkriesrath mildly and attentively.

"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advisin one to expect the
worst," said the Austrian eneral, evidently wishin to have done with
jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the
aide-de-camp.

"Excuse me, eneral," interrupted Kutuzov, also turnin to Prince
Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, et from Kozlovski all the reports
from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one
from His Hihness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,
handin him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all
this, showin all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian
army, and then ive it to his excellency."

Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of havin understood from the
first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked
to tell him. He athered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped
softly over the carpet and went out into the waitin room.

Thouh not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
had chaned reatly durin that period. In the expression of his face,
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
affected lanuor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time to
think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
areeable and interestin work. His face expressed more satisfaction
with himself and those around him, his smile and lance were brihter
and more attractive.

Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,
promised not to foret him, distinuished him above the other adjutants,
and had taken him to Vienna and iven him the more serious commissions.
From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.

Your son bids fair to become an officer distinuished by his industry,
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
subordinate by me.

On Kutuzov's staff, amon his fellow officers and in the army enerally,
Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersbur society, two quite
opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowleded him to be different
from themselves and from everyone else, expected reat thins of him,
listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince Andrew
was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
considered him conceited, cold, and disareeable. But amon these people
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
feared him.

Comin out of Kutuzov's room into the waitin room with the papers in
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Kozlovski, who was sittin at the window with a book.

"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.

"I am ordered to write a memorandum explainin why we are not
advancin."

"And why is it?"

Prince Andrew shrued his shoulders.

"Any news from Mack?"

"No."

"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."

"Probably," said Prince Andrew movin toward the outer door.

But at that instant a tall Austrian eneral in a reatcoat, with the
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandae round his head,
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slammin the door.
Prince Andrew stopped short.

"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived eneral speakin
quickly with a harsh erman accent, lookin to both sides and advancin
straiht toward the inner door.

"The commander-in-chief is enaed," said Kozlovski, oin hurriedly up
to the unknown eneral and blockin his way to the door. "Whom shall I
announce?"

The unknown eneral looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was
rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.

"The commander-in-chief is enaed," repeated Kozlovski calmly.

The eneral's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took out
a notebook, hurriedly scribbled somethin in pencil, tore out the leaf,
ave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself
into a chair, azin at those in the room as if askin, "Why do they
look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he
intended to say somethin, but immediately, with affected indifference,
bean to hum to himself, producin a queer sound which immediately broke
off. The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the
doorway. The eneral with the bandaed head bent forward as thouh
runnin away from some daner, and, makin lon, quick strides with his
thin les, went up to Kutuzov.

"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.

Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
and his forehead became smooth aain, he bowed his head respectfully,
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
the door himself behind him.

The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.

Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
lay in the eneral proress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
details of his disaster he understood that half the campain was lost,
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, and
vividly imained what awaited it and the part he would have to play.
Involuntarily he felt a joyful aitation at the thouht of the
humiliation of arroant Austria and that in a week's time he miht,
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
French since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's enius miht
outweih all the courae of the Russian troops, and at the same time
could not admit the idea of his hero bein disraced.

Excited and irritated by these thouhts Prince Andrew went toward his
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wa Zherkov; they
were as usual lauhin.

"Why are you so lum?" asked Nesvitski noticin Prince Andrew's pale
face and litterin eyes.

"There's nothin to be ay about," answered Bolkonski.

Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian eneral who on
Kutuzov's staff in chare of the provisionin of the Russian army, and
the member of the Hofkriesrath who had arrived the previous evenin.
There was room enouh in the wide corridor for the enerals to pass the
three officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushin Nesvitski aside with
his arm, said in a breathless voice,

"They're comin!... they're comin!... Stand aside, make way, please
make way!"

The enerals were passin by, lookin as if they wished to avoid
embarrassin attentions. On the face of the wa Zherkov there suddenly
appeared a stupid smile of lee which he seemed unable to suppress.

"Your excellency," said he in erman, steppin forward and addressin
the Austrian eneral, "I have the honor to conratulate you."

He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the
other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancin lesson.

The member of the Hofkriesrath looked at him severely but, seein the
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but ive him a moment's
attention. He screwed up his eyes showin that he was listenin.

"I have the honor to conratulate you. eneral Mack has arrived, quite
well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointin with a
beamin smile to his head.

The eneral frowned, turned away, and went on.

"ott, wie naiv!" * said he anrily, after he had one a few steps.


* "ood od, what simplicity!"

Nesvitski with a lauh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
Bolkonski, turnin still paler, pushed him away with an anry look and
turned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of
Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thouht of what lay before the
Russian army found vent in aner at Zherkov's untimely jest.

"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,
with a sliht tremblin of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doin
so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I
will teach you to behave yourself."

Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they azed
at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.

"What's the matter? I only conratulated them," said Zherkov.

"I am not jestin with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and
takin Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.

"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski tryin to soothe
him.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standin still in his
excitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers servin
our Tsar and our country, rejoicin in the successes and rievin at the
misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care
nothin for their master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres et
l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *
he said, as if strenthenin his views by this French sentence. "C'est
bien pour un arcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un
ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy could
amuse himself in this way," he added in Russian--but pronouncin the
word with a French accent--havin noticed that Zherkov could still hear
him.


* "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed,
and you find that a cause for jestin!"

* (2) "It is all very well for that ood-for-nothin fellow of whom you
have made a friend, but not for you, not for you."

He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned
and went out of the corridor.




CHAPTER IV

The Pavlorad Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The
squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in the
erman villae of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the villae were
assined to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
throuhout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov,
ever since he had overtaken the reiment in Poland, had lived with the
squadron commander.

On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news
of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
proceedin as usual. Denisov, who had been losin at cards all niht,
had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the mornin from a
forain expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
horse, rode up to the porch, swun his le over the saddle with a supple
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
part from his horse, and at last spran down and called to his orderly.

"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up
headlon to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
continued, with that ay brotherly cordiality which oodhearted youn
people show to everyone when they are happy.

"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian aily, tossin his head.

"Mind, walk him up and down well!"

Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to
serve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then his flank, and
linered for a moment.

"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thouht with a smile, and
holdin up his saber, his spurs jinlin, he ran up the steps of the
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in
hand, was clearin manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
immediately brihtened on seein Rostov. "Schon ut Moren! Schon ut
Moren!" * he said winkin with a merry smile, evidently pleased to
reet the youn man.


* "A very ood mornin! A very ood mornin!"

"Schon fleissi?" * said Rostov with the same ay brotherly smile which
did not leave his eaer face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser
Alexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quotin words often repeated by the
erman landlord.


* "Busy already?"

* (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians! Hurrah for
Emperor Alexander!"

The erman lauhed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and
wavin it above his head cried:

"Und die anze Welt hoch!" *


* "And hurrah for the whole world!"

Rostov waved his cap above his head like the erman and cried lauhin,
"Und vivat die anze Welt!" Thouh neither the erman cleanin his
cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from forain for hay had any
reason for rejoicin, they looked at each other with joyful deliht and
brotherly love, waed their heads in token of their mutual affection,
and parted smilin, the erman returnin to his cowshed and Rostov oin
to the cottae he occupied with Denisov.

"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom
all the reiment knew for a roue.

"Hasn't been in since the evenin. Must have been losin," answered
Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to bra about
it, but if he stays out till mornin it means he's lost and will come
back in a rae. Will you have coffee?"

"Yes, brin some."

Ten minutes later Lavrushka brouht the coffee. "He's comin!" said he.
"Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov
comin home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparklin black
eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak,
wide breeches hanin down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the back
of his head. He came up to the porch loomily, hanin his head.

"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and anrily, "take it off, blockhead!"

"Well, I am takin it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.

"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, enterin the room.

"Lon ao," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have
seen Fraulein Mathilde."

"Weally! And I've been losin, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damned
fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncin his r's. "Such ill luck! Such ill
luck. As soon as you left, it bean and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"

Puckerin up his face thouh smilin, and showin his short stron
teeth, he bean with stubby finers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
tanled black hair.

"And what devil made me o to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "the
rat") he said, rubbin his forehead and whole face with both hands.
"Just fancy, he didn't let me win a sinle cahd, not one cahd."

He took the lihted pipe that was offered to him, ripped it in his
fist, and tapped it on the floor, makin the sparks fly, while he
continued to shout.

"He lets one win the sinles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;
ives the sinles and snatches the doubles!"

He scattered the burnin tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.
Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
with his litterin, black eyes at Rostov.

"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothin foh one to do
but dwink. If we could only et to fihtin soon. Hullo, who's there?"
he said, turnin to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the
clinkin of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful couh.

"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.

Denisov's face puckered still more.

"Wetched!" he muttered, throwin down a purse with some old in it.
"Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the
purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.

Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranin the old and new coins
in separate piles, bean countin them.

"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last niht," came Denisov's
voice from the next room.

"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a pipin voice,
and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, entered
the room.

Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand
which was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferred
from the uards just before this campain. He behaved very well in the
reiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was
unable to overcome or conceal his roundless antipathy to the man.

"Well, youn cavalryman, how is my Rook behavin?" he asked. (Rook was a
youn horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)

The lieutenant never looked the man he was speakin to straiht in the
face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.

"I saw you ridin this mornin..." he added.

"Oh, he's all riht, a ood horse," answered Rostov, thouh the horse
for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum.
"He's beun to o a little lame on the left forele," he added.

"The hoof's cracked! That's nothin. I'll teach you what to do and show
you what kind of rivet to use."

"Yes, please do," said Rostov.

"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse
you'll thank me for."

"Then I'll have it brouht round," said Rostov wishin to avoid
Telyanin, and he went out to ive the order.

In the passae Denisov, with a pipe, was squattin on the threshold
facin the quartermaster who was reportin to him. On seein Rostov,
Denisov screwed up his face and pointin over his shoulder with his
thumb to the room where Telyanin was sittin, he frowned and ave a
shudder of disust.

"Uh! I don't like that fellow," he said, reardless of the
quartermaster's presence.

Rostov shrued his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's
one to do?" and, havin iven his order, he returned to Telyanin.

Telyanin was sittin in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left
him, rubbin his small white hands.

"Well there certainly are disustin people," thouht Rostov as he
entered.

"Have you told them to brin the horse?" asked Telyanin, ettin up and
lookin carelessly about him.

"I have."

"Let us o ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday's
order. Have you ot it, Denisov?"

"Not yet. But where are you off to?"

"I want to teach this youn man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.

They went throuh the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant
explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.

When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausae on the
table. Denisov was sittin there scratchin with his pen on a sheet of
paper. He looked loomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witin to
her."

He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,
evidently lad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
write, told Rostov the contents of his letter.

"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We are
childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a od, one is
pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to the
devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
least abashed.

"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermaster
for the money."

Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.

"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the
puhse?" he asked, turnin to Rostov.

"Seven new and three old imperials."

"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standin there for, you sca'cwow?
Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.

"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," said
Rostov, blushin.

"Don't like bowwowin from my own fellows, I don't," rowled Denisov.

"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend
me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.

"No, I tell you."

And Denisov went to the bed to et the purse from under the pillow.

"Where have you put it, Wostov?"

"Under the lower pillow."

"It's not there."

Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.

"That's a miwacle."

"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, pickin up the pillows one
at a time and shakin them.

He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.

"Dear me, can I have forotten? No, I remember thinkin that you kept it
under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here.
Where is it?" he asked, turnin to Lavrushka.

"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."

"But it isn't?..."

"You're always like that; you thwow a thin down anywhere and foret it.
Feel in your pockets."

"No, if I hadn't thouht of it bein a treasure," said Rostov, "but I
remember puttin it there."

Lavrushka turned all the beddin over, looked under the bed and under
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the
latter threw up his arms in surprise sayin it was nowhere to be found
Denisov lanced at Rostov.

"Wostov, you've not been playin schoolboy twicks..."

Rostov felt Denisov's aze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantly
dropped them aain. All the blood which had seemed conested somewhere
below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.

"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and
yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.

"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted
Denisov, suddenly, turnin purple and rushin at the man with a
threatenin esture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flo you, I'll flo
you all."

Rostov, his eyes avoidin Denisov, bean buttonin his coat, buckled on
his saber, and put on his cap.

"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shakin his
orderly by the shoulders and knockin him aainst the wall.

"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, oin
toward the door without raisin his eyes. Denisov paused, thouht a
moment, and, evidently understandin what Rostov hinted at, seized his
arm.

"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out
like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse is
here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."

"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and
went to the door.

"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushin at
the cadet to restrain him.

But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much aner as thouh Denisov
were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.

"Do you understand what you're sayin?" he said in a tremblin voice.
"There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not
so, then..."

He could not finish, and ran out of the room.

"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostov
heard.

Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.

"The master is not in, he's one to headquarters," said Telyanin's
orderly. "Has somethin happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's
troubled face.

"No, nothin."

"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.

The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and
Rostov, without returnin home, took a horse and rode there. There was
an inn in the villae which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to
it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.

In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sittin over a dish of
sausaes and a bottle of wine.

"Ah, you've come here too, youn man!" he said, smilin and raisin his
eyebrows.

"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a reat deal to utter the word; and
he sat down at the nearest table.

Both were silent. There were two ermans and a Russian officer in the
room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives
and the munchin of the lieutenant.

When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double
purse and, drawin its rins aside with his small, white, turned-up
finers, drew out a old imperial, and liftin his eyebrows ave it to
the waiter.

"Please be quick," he said.

The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.

"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible,
voice.

With shiftin eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him the
purse.

"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, rowin suddenly pale, and
added, "Look at it, youn man."

Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and
looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was lookin about in his usual way
and suddenly seemed to row very merry.

"If we et to Vienna I'll et rid of it there but in these wretched
little towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have
it, youn man, I'm oin."

Rostov did not speak.

"And you? Are you oin to have lunch too? They feed you quite decently
here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."

He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let o of
it. Telyanin took the purse and bean carelessly slippin it into the
pocket of his ridin breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
slihtly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am puttin my purse in my
pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business."

"Well, youn man?" he said with a sih, and from under his lifted brows
he lanced into Rostov's eyes.

Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's
and back, and back aain and aain in an instant.

"Come here," said Rostov, catchin hold of Telyanin's arm and almost
drain him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." he
whispered just above Telyanin's ear.

"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.

But these words came like a piteous, despairin cry and an entreaty for
pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fell
from him. He was lad, and at the same instant bean to pity the
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had beun had to be
completed.

"Heaven only knows what the people here may imaine," muttered Telyanin,
takin up his cap and movin toward a small empty room. "We must have an
explanation..."

"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.

"I..."

Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face bean to quiver, his
eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not risin
to Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible.

"Count!... Don't ruin a youn fellow... here is this wretched money,
take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and
mother!..."

Rostov took the money, avoidin Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
steps. "O od," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"

"Count..." said Telyanin drawin nearer to him.

"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawin back. "If you need it, take the
money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.




CHAPTER V

That same evenin there was an animated discussion amon the squadron's
officers in Denisov's quarters.

"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apoloize to the colonel!" said a
tall, rizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and many
wrinkles on his lare features, to Rostov who was crimson with
excitement.

The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for
affairs of honor and had twice reained his commission.

"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I
lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on duty
every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make me
apoloize, because if he, as commander of this reiment, thinks it
beneath his dinity to ive me satisfaction, then..."

"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the
staff captain in his deep bass, calmly strokin his lon mustache. "You
tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has
stolen..."

"I'm not to blame that the conversation bean in the presence of other
officers. Perhaps I ouht not to have spoken before them, but I am not a
diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinkin that here one
would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lyin--so let him ive
me satisfaction..."

"That's all riht. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point.
Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand
satisfaction of his reimental commander?"

Denisov sat loomily bitin his mustache and listenin to the
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
staff captain's question by a disapprovin shake of his head.

"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bodanich" (the colonel was
called Bodanich) "shuts you up."

"He did not shut me up, he said I was tellin an untruth."

"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must
apoloize."

"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.

"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and
severely. "You don't wish to apoloize, but, man, it's not only to him
but to the whole reiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. The
case is this: you ouht to have thouht the matter over and taken
advice; but no, you o and blurt it all straiht out before the
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
disrace the whole reiment? Disrace the whole reiment because of one
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that. And
Bodanich was a brick: he told you you were sayin what was not true.
It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thin over, some
conceit prevents your apoloizin, and you wish to make the whole affair
public. You are offended at bein put on duty a bit, but why not
apoloize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bodanich may be,
anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at takin
offense, but you don't mind disracin the whole reiment!" The staff
captain's voice bean to tremble. "You have been in the reiment next to
no time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointed
adjutant somewhere and can snap your finers when it is said 'There are
thieves amon the Pavlorad officers!' But it's not all the same to us!
Am I not riht, Denisov? It's not the same!"

Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with
his litterin black eyes at Rostov.

"You value your own pride and don't wish to apoloize," continued the
staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have rown up in and, od
willin, are oin to die in the reiment, we prize the honor of the
reiment, and Bodanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
all this is not riht, it's not riht! You may take offense or not but I
always stick to mother truth. It's not riht!"

And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.


"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumpin up. "Now then,
Wostov, now then!"

Rostov, rowin red and pale alternately, looked first at one officer
and then at the other.

"No, entlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You're
wron to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of the
reiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor
of the fla... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all
round. Well, what else do you want?..."

"Come, that's riht, Count!" cried the staff captain, turnin round and
clappin Rostov on the shoulder with his bi hand.

"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."

"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beinnin to address
Rostov by his title, as if in reconition of his confession. "o and
apoloize, your excellency. Yes, o!"

"entlemen, I'll do anythin. No one shall hear a word from me," said
Rostov in an implorin voice, "but I can't apoloize, by od I can't, do
what you will! How can I o and apoloize like a little boy askin
foriveness?"

Denisov bean to lauh.

"It'll be worse for you. Bodanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your
obstinacy," said Kirsten.

"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feelin. I
can't..."

"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become
of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.

"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"
muttered Denisov.

"It is an illness, there's no other way of explainin it," said the
staff captain.

"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shouted
Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.

Just then Zherkov entered the room.

"What brins you here?" cried the officers turnin to the newcomer.

"We're to o into action, entlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole
army."

"It's not true!"

"I've seen him myself!"

"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"

"Into action! Into action! Brin him a bottle for such news! But how did
you come here?"

"I've been sent back to the reiment all on account of that devil, Mack.
An Austrian eneral complained of me. I conratulated him on Mack's
arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out
of a hot bath."

"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."

The reimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brouht by
Zherkov. They were under orders to advance next day.

"We're oin into action, entlemen!"

"Well, thank od! We've been sittin here too lon!"




CHAPTER VI

Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroyin behind him the brides over
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the
Russian troops were crossin the river Enns. At midday the Russian
baae train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defilin
throuh the town of Enns on both sides of the bride.

It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out
before the heihts on which the Russian batteries stood uardin the
bride was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slantin rain, and
then, suddenly spread out in the sunliht, far-distant objects could be
clearly seen litterin as thouh freshly varnished. Down below, the
little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
cathedral, and its bride, on both sides of which streamed jostlin
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic backround of reen
treetops and bluish ores. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
wild virin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.

Amon the field uns on the brow of the hill the eneral in command of
the rearuard stood with a staff officer, scannin the country throuh
his fieldlass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the
rearuard by the commander-in-chief, was sittin on the trail of a un
carriae. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a
flask, and Nesvitski was treatin some officers to pies and real
doppelkummel. The officers ladly athered round him, some on their
knees, some squattin Turkish fashion on the wet rass.

"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a fine
place! Why are you not eatin anythin, entlemen?" Nesvitski was
sayin.

"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased to
be talkin to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place!
We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid
house!"

"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examinin the
countryside--"See, our infantrymen have already ot there. Look there in
the meadow behind the villae, three of them are drain somethin.
They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval.

"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,
munchin a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in
over there."

He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and
leamed.

"That would be fine, entlemen!"

The officers lauhed.

"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian irls amon
them. On my word I'd ive five years of my life for it!"

"They must be feelin dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,
lauhin.

Meanwhile the staff officer standin in front pointed out somethin to
the eneral, who looked throuh his field lass.

"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the eneral anrily, lowerin the field
lass and shruin his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the
crossin. And why are they dawdlin there?"

On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from
their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of
a shot, and our troops could be seen hurryin to the crossin.

Nesvitski rose, puffin, and went up to the eneral, smilin.

"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.

"It's a bad business," said the eneral without answerin him, "our men
have been wastin time."

"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.

"Yes, please do," answered the eneral, and he repeated the order that
had already once been iven in detail: "and tell the hussars that they
are to cross last and to fire the bride as I ordered; and the
inflammable material on the bride must be reinspected."

"Very ood," answered Nesvitski.

He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack
and flask, and swun his heavy person easily into the saddle.

"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched
him smilinly, and he rode off by the windin path down the hill.

"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said the
eneral, turnin to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass the
time."

"Crew, to your uns!" commanded the officer.

In a moment the men came runnin aily from their campfires and bean
loadin.

"One!" came the command.

Number one jumped briskly aside. The un ran out with a deafenin
metallic roar, and a whistlin renade flew above the heads of our
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
showin the spot where it burst.

The faces of officers and men brihtened up at the sound. Everyone ot
up and bean watchin the movements of our troops below, as plainly
visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of the
approachin enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot and
the brilliance of the briht sunshine mered in a sinle joyous and
spirited impression.




CHAPTER VII

Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bride, where
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had
alihted from his horse and whose bi body was jammed aainst the
railins. He looked back lauhin to the Cossack who stood a few steps
behind him holdin two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back aain and
pressed him aainst the railins, and all he could do was to smile.

"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy
soldier with a waon, who was pressin onto the infantrymen who were
crowded toether close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! You
can't wait a moment! Don't you see the eneral wants to pass?"

But the convoyman took no notice of the word "eneral" and shouted at
the soldiers who were blockin his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the
left! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded toether shoulder to
shoulder, their bayonets interlockin, moved over the bride in a dense
mass. Lookin down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy
little waves of the Enns, which ripplin and eddyin round the piles of
the bride chased each other alon. Lookin on the bride he saw equally
uniform livin waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
knapsacks, bayonets, lon muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
feet that moved throuh the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
bride. Sometimes throuh the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with a
type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way alon;
sometimes like a chip of wood whirlin in the river, an hussar on foot,
an orderly, or a townsman was carried throuh the waves of infantry; and
sometimes like a lo floatin down the river, an officers' or company's
baae waon, piled hih, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
moved across the bride.

"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there
many more of you to come?"

"A million all but one!" replied a waish soldier in a torn coat, with
a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.

"If he" (he meant the enemy) "beins poppin at the bride now," said
the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll foret to scratch
yourself."

That soldier passed on, and after him came another sittin on a cart.

"Where the devil have the le bands been shoved to?" said an orderly,
runnin behind the cart and fumblin in the back of it.

And he also passed on with the waon. Then came some merry soldiers who
had evidently been drinkin.

"And then, old fellow, he ives him one in the teeth with the butt end
of his un..." a soldier whose reatcoat was well tucked up said aily,
with a wide swin of his arm.

"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud lauh.
And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had been
struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.

"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all
be killed," a sereant was sayin anrily and reproachfully.

"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a youn soldier with
an enormous mouth, hardly refrainin from lauhin, "I felt like dyin
of friht. I did, 'pon my word, I ot that frihtened!" said he, as if
brain of havin been frihtened.

That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had one
before. It was a erman cart with a pair of horses led by a erman, and
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
a lare udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned
baby, an old woman, and a healthy erman irl with briht red cheeks
were sittin on some feather beds. Evidently these fuitives were
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passin at foot pace
all the soldiers' remarks related to the two youn ones. Every face bore
almost the same smile, expressin unseemly thouhts about the women.

"Just see, the erman sausae is makin tracks, too!"

"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressin the erman, who,
anry and frihtened, strode eneretically alon with downcast eyes.

"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"

"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"

"I have seen as much before now, mate!"

"Where are you oin?" asked an infantry officer who was eatin an
apple, also half smilin as he looked at the handsome irl.

The erman closed his eyes, sinifyin that he did not understand.

"Take it if you like," said the officer, ivin the irl an apple.

The irl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the
bride did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When
they had one by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of a
convoy waon became restive at the end of the bride, and the whole
crowd had to wait.

"And why are they stoppin? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers.
"Where are you shovin to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll be
worse if he fires the bride. See, here's an officer jammed in too"--
different voices were sayin in the crowd, as the men looked at one
another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bride.

Lookin down at the waters of the Enns under the bride, Nesvitski
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of somethin swiftly approachin...
somethin bi, that splashed into the water.

"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, lookin
round at the sound.

"Encourain us to et alon quicker," said another uneasily.

The crowd moved on aain. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.

"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! et out of the
way! Make way!"

With reat difficulty he manaed to et to his horse, and shoutin
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
for him, but aain pressed on him so that they jammed his le, and those
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
harder from behind.

"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind
him.

Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by
the livin mass of movin infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shay, with
his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanin jauntily over
his shoulder.

"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov
evidently in a fit of rae, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
whites litterin and rollin as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
bare hand as red as his face.

"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"

"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showin his white
teeth fiercely and spurrin his black thorouhbred Arab, which twitched
its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurtin white foam
from his bit, trampin the planks of the bride with his hoofs, and
apparently ready to jump over the railins had his rider let him. "What
is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the way!... Let us
pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with my
saber!" he shouted, actually drawin his saber from its scabbard and
flourishin it.

The soldiers crowded aainst one another with terrified faces, and
Denisov joined Nesvitski.

"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other had
ridden up to him.

"They don't even ive one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "They
keep dwain the weiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fiht,
let's fiht. But the devil knows what this is."

"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, lookin at Denisov's new
cloak and saddlecloth.

Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused
a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.

"Of course. I'm oin into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and
scented myself."

The imposin fiure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and the
determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
frantically, had such an effect that they manaed to squeeze throuh to
the farther side of the bride and stopped the infantry. Beside the
bride Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
and havin done this he rode back.

Havin cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bride.
Carelessly holdin in his stallion that was neihin and pawin the
round, eaer to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
nearer. Then the clan of hoofs, as of several horses allopin,
resounded on the planks of the bride, and the squadron, officers in
front and men four abreast, spread across the bride and bean to emere
on his side of it.

The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bride in the
trampled mud and azed with that particular feelin of ill-will,
estranement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
reular order.

"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.

"What ood are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.

"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancin
horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.

"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine
cords would soon et a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wipin the mud
off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird
than a man."

"There now, Zikin, they ouht to put you on a horse. You'd look fine,"
said a corporal, chaffin a thin little soldier who bent under the
weiht of his knapsack.

"Take a stick between your les, that'll suit you for a horse!" the
hussar shouted back.




CHAPTER VIII

The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bride, squeezin
toether as they approached it as if passin throuh a funnel. At last
the baae waons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
battalion came onto the bride. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars
remained on the farther side of the bride facin the enemy, who could
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
the bride, for the horizon as seen from the valley throuh which the
river flowed was formed by the risin round only half a mile away. At
the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few roups of our
Cossack scouts were movin. Suddenly on the road at the top of the hih
round, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
French. A roup of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, thouh they tried to talk of
other thins and to look in other directions, thouht only of what was
there on the hilltop, and kept constantly lookin at the patches
appearin on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. The
weather had cleared aain since noon and the sun was descendin brihtly
upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and at
intervals the bule calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firin, and that
stern, threatenin, inaccessible, and intanible line which separates
two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.

"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividin
the livin from the dead lies uncertainty, sufferin, and death. And
what is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, that
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear
and yet lon to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
stron, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
excitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate feels,
anyone who comes in siht of the enemy, and that feelin ives a
particular lamour and lad keenness of impression to everythin that
takes place at such moments.

On the hih round where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose, and
a ball flew whistlin over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
officers who had been standin toether rode off to their places. The
hussars bean carefully alinin their horses. Silence fell on the whole
squadron. All were lookin at the enemy in front and at the squadron
commander, awaitin the word of command. A second and a third cannon
ball flew past. Evidently they were firin at the hussars, but the balls
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holdin its breath while the
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back aain. The soldiers
without turnin their heads lanced at one another, curious to see their
comrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the buler,
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,
around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, lookin at the
soldiers as if threatenin to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every
time a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--a
handsome horse despite its ame le--had the happy air of a schoolboy
called up before a lare audience for an examination in which he feels
sure he will distinuish himself. He was lancin at everyone with a
clear, briht expression, as if askin them to notice how calmly he sat
under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication of
somethin new and stern showed round the mouth.

"Who's that curtseyin there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wiht! Look at
me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turnin
his horse in front of the squadron.

The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short
sturdy fiure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy finers in which he
held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,
especially toward evenin when he had emptied his second bottle; he was
only redder than usual. With his shay head thrown back like birds when
they drink, pressin his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his ood
horse, Bedouin, and sittin as thouh fallin backwards in the saddle,
he alloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse
voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. The
staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meet
him. His face with its lon mustache was serious as always, only his
eyes were brihter than usual.

"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fiht.
You'll see--we shall retire."

"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,
Wostov," he cried noticin the cadet's briht face, "you've ot it at
last."

And he smiled approvinly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov felt
perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bride. Denisov
alloped up to him.

"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."

"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckerin up his
face as if drivin off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stoppin
here? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreatin? Lead the squadron
back."

The squadron crossed the bride and drew out of rane of fire without
havin lost a sinle man. The second squadron that had been in the front
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
of the river.

The two Pavlorad squadrons, havin crossed the bride, retired up the
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bodanich Schubert, came
up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov,
without takin any notice of him althouh they were now meetin for the
first time since their encounter concernin Telyanin. Rostov, feelin
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
colonel's athletic back, his nape covered with liht hair, and his red
neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bodanich was only pretendin not to
notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courae,
so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed to
him that Bodanich rode so near in order to show him his courae. Next
he thouht that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
just to punish him--Rostov. Then he imained how, after the attack,
Bodanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would mananimously
extend the hand of reconciliation.

The hih-shouldered fiure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlorads as he
had but recently left their reiment, rode up to the colonel. After his
dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the reiment,
sayin he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could et
more rewards by doin nothin on the staff, and had succeeded in
attachin himself as an orderly officer to Prince Baration. He now came
to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear uard.

"Colonel," he said, addressin Rostov's enemy with an air of loomy
ravity and lancin round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop
and fire the bride."

"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.

"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,
"but the prince told me to 'o and tell the colonel that the hussars
must return quickly and fire the bride.'"

Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski
came allopin up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
weiht.

"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to fire
the bride, and now someone has one and blundered; they are all beside
themselves over there and one can't make anythin out."

The colonel deliberately stopped the reiment and turned to Nesvitski.

"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said
nothin about firin it."

"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, takin off his cap and
smoothin his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I
tellin you to fire the bride, when inflammable material had been put
in position?"

"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to
burn the bride! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly
to obey. You said the bride would be burned, but who would it burn, I
could not know by the holy spirit!"

"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.
"How did you et here?" said he, turnin to Zherkov.

"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wrin you out!"

"You were sayin, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in an
offended tone.

"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or
the enemy will brin up his uns to use rapeshot."

The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout
staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.

"I will the bride fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announce
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still
do the riht thin.

Strikin his horse with his lon muscular les as if it were to blame
for everythin, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
squadron, that in which Rostov was servin under Denisov, to return to
the bride.

"There, it's just as I thouht," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes to
test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let
him see whether I am a coward!" he thouht.

Aain on all the briht faces of the squadron the serious expression
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,
the colonel, closely--to find in his face confirmation of his own
conjecture, but the colonel did not once lance at Rostov, and looked as
he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word of
command.

"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.

Their sabers catchin in the bridles and their spurs jinlin, the
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowin what they were to do. The men
were crossin themselves. Rostov no loner looked at the colonel, he had
no time. He was afraid of fallin behind the hussars, so much afraid
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he ave his horse into
an orderly's chare, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a
thud. Denisov rode past him, leanin back and shoutin somethin. Rostov
saw nothin but the hussars runnin all around him, their spurs catchin
and their sabers clatterin.

"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.

Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,
tryin only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bride, not
lookin at the round, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.

"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who, havin
ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bride, with a
triumphant, cheerful face.

Rostov wipin his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and
was about to run on, thinkin that the farther he went to the front the
better. But Bodanich, without lookin at or reconizin Rostov, shouted
to him:

"Who's that runnin on the middle of the bride? To the riht! Come
back, Cadet!" he cried anrily; and turnin to Denisov, who, showin off
his courae, had ridden on to the planks of the bride:

"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.

"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turnin in
his saddle.

Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standin
toether out of rane of the shots, watchin, now the small roup of men
with yellow shakos, dark-reen jackets braided with cord, and blue
ridin breeches, who were swarmin near the bride, and then at what was
approachin in the distance from the opposite side--the blue uniforms
and roups with horses, easily reconizable as artillery.

"Will they burn the bride or not? Who'll et there first? Will they et
there and fire the bride or will the French et within rapeshot rane
and wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops on
the hih round above the bride involuntarily asked himself with a
sinkin heart--watchin the bride and the hussars in the briht evenin
liht and the blue tunics advancin from the other side with their
bayonets and uns.

"Uh. The hussars will et it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within
rapeshot rane now."

"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.

"True enouh," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done
the job just as well."

"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,
but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he
was speakin in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look
at thins! Send two men? And who then would ive us the Vladimir medal
and ribbon? But now, even if they do et peppered, the squadron may be
recommended for honors and he may et a ribbon. Our Bodanich knows how
thins are done."

"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's rapeshot."

He pointed to the French uns, the limbers of which were bein detached
and hurriedly removed.

On the French side, amid the roups with cannon, a cloud of smoke
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
reports one after another, and a third.

"Oh! Oh!" roaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizin the officer of
the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"

"Two, I think."

"If I were Tsar I would never o to war," said Nesvitski, turnin away.

The French uns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue
uniforms advanced toward the bride at a run. Smoke appeared aain but
at irreular intervals, and rapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
bride. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happenin there,
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
settin it on fire and the French batteries were now firin at them, no
loner to hinder them but because the uns were trained and there was
someone to fire at.

The French had time to fire three rounds of rapeshot before the hussars
ot back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too
hih, but the last round fell in the midst of a roup of hussars and
knocked three of them over.

Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bodanich, had paused on the
bride not knowin what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he had
always imained battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
bride because he had not brouht any burnin straw with him like the
other soldiers. He stood lookin about him, when suddenly he heard a
rattle on the bride as if nuts were bein spilt, and the hussar nearest
to him fell aainst the rails with a roan. Rostov ran up to him with
the others. Aain someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the
hussar and bean liftin him.

"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still
he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.

Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searchin for somethin, azed
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep! How
briht and lorious was the settin sun! With what soft litter the
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious ores, and
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
and happiness... "I should wish for nothin else, nothin, if only I
were there," thouht Rostov. "In myself alone and in that sunshine there
is so much happiness; but here... roans, sufferin, fear, and this
uncertainty and hurry... There--they are shoutin aain, and aain are
all runnin back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is
here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never aain see
the sun, this water, that ore!..."

At that instant the sun bean to hide behind the clouds, and other
stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and of
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all mered into one
feelin of sickenin aitation.

"O Lord od! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forive, and protect
me!" Rostov whispered.

The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices
sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from siht.

"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above
his ear.

"It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thouht Rostov, and
sihin deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood restin one foot,
from the orderly and bean to mount.

"Was that rapeshot?" he asked Denisov.

"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like weular bwicks and
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hackin away at the dos!
But this sort of thin is the very devil, with them shootin at you like
a taret."

And Denisov rode up to a roup that had stopped near Rostov, composed of
the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite.

"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thouht Rostov. And this was
true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which
the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.

"Here's somethin for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't et
promoted to a sublieutenancy."

"Inform the prince that I the bride fired!" said the colonel
triumphantly and aily.

"And if he asks about the losses?"

"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,
and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and
pronouncin the phrase "knocked out" with rinin distinctness.




CHAPTER IX

Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command
of Bonaparte, encounterin a population that was unfriendly to it,
losin confidence in its allies, sufferin from shortness of supplies,
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anythin that had
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded by
Kutuzov was hurriedly retreatin alon the Danube, stoppin where
overtaken by the enemy and fihtin rearuard actions only as far as
necessary to enable it to retreat without losin its heavy equipment.
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
courae and endurance--acknowleded even by the enemy--with which the
Russians fouht, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had
joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army, and
Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces. The
defense of Vienna was no loner to be thouht of. Instead of an
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
modern science of strateics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriesrath, the sole and almost unattainable
aim remainin for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
advancin from Russia, without losin his army as Mack had done at Ulm.

On the twenty-eihth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with
the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
banners, cannon, and two enemy enerals. For the first time, after a
fortniht's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fiht had
not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Thouh the troops
were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number in
killed, wounded, sick, and stralers; thouh a number of sick and
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and thouh
the bi hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
hospitals could no loner accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
the army considerably. Throuhout the whole army and at headquarters
most joyful thouh erroneous rumors were rife of the imainary approach
of columns from Russia, of some victory ained by the Austrians, and of
the retreat of the frihtened Bonaparte.

Prince Andrew durin the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
eneral Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
wounded under him and his own arm slihtly razed by a bullet. As a mark
of the commander-in-chief's special favor he was sent with the news of
this victory to the Austrian court, now no loner at Vienna (which was
threatened by the French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatiue far better than many
very muscular men, and on the niht of the battle, havin arrived at
Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov,
he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent
meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.

The niht was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that
had fallen the previous day--the day of the battle. Reviewin his
impressions of the recent battle, picturin pleasantly to himself the
impression his news of a victory would create, or recallin the send-off
iven him by the commander-in-chief and his fellow officers, Prince
Andrew was allopin alon in a post chaise enjoyin the feelins of a
man who has at lenth beun to attain a lon-desired happiness. As soon
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he bean to imaine that the
Russians were runnin away and that he himself was killed, but he
quickly roused himself with a feelin of joy, as if learnin afresh that
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He
aain recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courae
durin the battle, and feelin reassured he dozed off.... The dark
starry niht was followed by a briht cheerful mornin. The snow was
thawin in the sunshine, the horses alloped quickly, and on both sides
of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villaes.

At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. The
Russian officer in chare of the transport lolled back in the front
cart, shoutin and scoldin a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of the
lon erman carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaed men were bein
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talkin (he heard Russian
words), others were eatin bread; the more severely wounded looked
silently, with the lanuid interest of sick children, at the envoy
hurryin past them.

Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
action they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and ave the
soldier three old pieces.

"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.

"et well soon, lads!" he continued, turnin to the soldiers. "There's
plenty to do still."

"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a
conversation.

"ood news!... o on!" he shouted to the driver, and they alloped on.

It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by hih buildins, the
lihts of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriaes, and all that
atmosphere of a lare and active town which is always so attractive to a
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless niht,
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more viorous and
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes leamed feverishly
and his thouhts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
rapidity. He aain vividly recalled the details of the battle, no loner
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imained himself
statin them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imained the casual
questions that miht be put to him and the answers he would ive. He
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
to the palace, however, an official came runnin out to meet him, and
learnin that he was a special messener led him to another entrance.

"To the riht from the corridor, Euer Hocheboren! There you will find
the adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to the
Minister of War."

The adjutant on duty, meetin Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowin
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him alon a
corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messener.

Prince Andrew's joyous feelin was considerably weakened as he
approached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, and
without his noticin it the feelin of offense immediately turned into
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly
suested to him a point of view which ave him a riht to despise the
adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they probably
think it easy to ain victories!" he thouht. His eyes narrowed
disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly
deliberate steps. This feelin of disdain was heihtened when he saw the
minister seated at a lare table readin some papers and makin pencil
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes takin no notice
of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent
bald head with its ray temples. He went on readin to the end, without
raisin his eyes at the openin of the door and the sound of footsteps.

"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handin him the
papers and still takin no notice of the special messener.

Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interested
the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was concerned
with, or he wanted to ive the Russian special messener that
impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he
thouht. The minister drew the remainin papers toether, arraned them
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intellient
expression on his face chaned in a way evidently deliberate and
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
continually receivin many petitioners one after another.

"From eneral Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is ood news?
There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was hih time!"

He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and bean to read it
with a mournful expression.

"Oh, my od! My od! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in erman. "What a calamity!
What a calamity!"

Havin lanced throuh the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked
at Prince Andrew, evidently considerin somethin.

"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is not
captured." Aain he pondered. "I am very lad you have brouht ood
news, thouh Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory.
His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank you!
You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade.
However, I will let you know."

The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speakin,
reappeared.

"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see
you," he added, bowin his head.

When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest and
happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
whole tenor of his thouhts instantaneously chaned; the battle seemed
the memory of a remote event lon past.




CHAPTER X

Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of
his in the diplomatic service.

"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said
Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince's
thins in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was usherin Bolkonski
in. "So you're a messener of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sittin
here ill, as you see."

After washin and dressin, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibin
settled down comfortably beside the fire.

After his journey and the campain durin which he had been deprived of
all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose amon luxurious surroundins such
as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian (for
they were speakin French) at least with a Russian who would, he
supposed, share the eneral Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
then particularly stron.

Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersbur, but
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.
Just as Prince Andrew was a youn man who ave promise of risin hih in
the military profession, so to an even reater extent Bilibin ave
promise of risin in his diplomatic career. He still a youn man but no
loner a youn diplomat, as he had entered the service at the ae of
sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhaen, and now held a rather
important post in Vienna. Both the forein minister and our ambassador
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain neative qualities,
avoid doin certain thins, and speak French. He was one of those, who,
likin work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
sometimes spend a whole niht at his writin table. He worked well
whatever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?" but
the question "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter
miht be he did not care, but it ave him reat pleasure to prepare a
circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and eleantly.
Bilibin's services were valued not only for what he wrote, but also for
his skill in dealin and conversin with those in the hihest spheres.

Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made
eleantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
somethin strikin and took part in a conversation only when that was
possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily oriinal,
finished phrases of eneral interest. These sayins were prepared in the
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
that insinificant society people miht carry them from drawin room to
drawin room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about in
the Viennese drawin rooms and often had an influence on matters
considered important.

His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's finers after a
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and deep
wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
twinkled and looked out straiht.

"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.

Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentionin himself, described the
enaement and his reception by the Minister of War.

"They received me and my news as one receives a do in a ame of
skittles," said he in conclusion.

Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.

"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examinin his nails from a distance
and puckerin the skin above his left eye, "malre la haute estime que
je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire
n'est pas des plus victorieuses." *


* "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox Russian
army, I must say that your victory was not particularly victorious."

He went on talkin in this way in French, utterin only those words in
Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.

"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier and
his one division, and even then Mortier slips throuh your finers!
Where's the victory?"

"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without
boastin that it was a little better than at Ulm..."

"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"

"Because not everythin happens as one expects or with the smoothness of
a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to et at their rear by seven
in the mornin but had not reached it by five in the afternoon."

"And why didn't you do it at seven in the mornin? You ouht to have
been there at seven in the mornin," returned Bilibin with a smile. "You
ouht to have been there at seven in the mornin."

"Why did you not succeed in impressin on Bonaparte by diplomatic
methods that he had better leave enoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in
the same tone.

"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinkin it's very easy to take
marshals, sittin on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why
didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Minister
of War but also his Most Auust Majesty the Emperor and Kin Francis is
not much delihted by your victory. Even I, a poor secretary of the
Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to ive my
Franz a thaler, or let him o with his Liebchen to the Prater... True,
we have no Prater here..."

He looked straiht at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
forehead.

"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "I
confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties
here beyond my feeble intellience, but I can't make it out. Mack loses
a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl ive no sins
of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at last ains a
real victory, destroyin the spell of the invincibility of the French,
and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details."

"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for
Russia, for the Orthodox reek faith! All that is beautiful, but what do
we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Brin us nice
news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as
ood as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire briade
of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off some
cannon! But this sort of thin seems done on purpose to vex us. The
Archduke Karl does nothin, the Archduke Ferdinand disraces himself.
You abandon Vienna, ive up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is
with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one eneral whom we
all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you conratulate us
on the victory! Admit that more irritatin news than yours could not
have been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.
Besides, suppose you did ain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke
Karl ained a victory, what effect would that have on the eneral course
of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French
army!"

"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"

"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our
dear Count Vrbna, oes to him for orders."

After the fatiues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and
especially after havin dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in
the full sinificance of the words he heard.

"Count Lichtenfels was here this mornin," Bilibin continued, "and
showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully
described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your
victory is not a matter for reat rejoicin and that you can't be
received as a savior."

"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince
Andrew, beinnin to understand that his news of the battle before Krems
was really of small importance in view of such events as the fall of
Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bride and
its celebrated bridehead and Prince Auersper? We heard reports that
Prince Auersper was defendin Vienna?" he said.

"Prince Auersper is on this, on our side of the river, and is defendin
us--doin it very badly, I think, but still he is defendin us. But
Vienna is on the other side. No, the bride has not yet been taken and I
hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been iven to blow
it up. Otherwise we should lon ao have been in the mountains of
Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour
between two fires."

"But still this does not mean that the campain is over," said Prince
Andrew.

"Well, I think it is. The biwis here think so too, but they daren't
say so. It will be as I said at the beinnin of the campain, it won't
be your skirmishin at Durrenstein, or unpowder at all, that will
decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quotin one
of his own mots, releasin the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausin.
"The only question is what will come of the meetin between the Emperor
Alexander and the Kin of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins the
Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If not it
is merely a question of settlin where the preliminaries of the new
Campo Formio are to be drawn up."

"What an extraordinary enius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
clenchin his small hand and strikin the table with it, "and what luck
the man has!"

"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquirinly, puckerin up his forehead to
indicate that he was about to say somethin witty. "Buonaparte?" he
repeated, accentuatin the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire race de l'u! * I
shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"


* "We must let him off the u!"

"But jokin apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the
campain is over?"

"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not
used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the first
place because her provinces have been pillaed--they say the Holy
Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital taken,
and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And
therefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we are
bein deceived, my instinct tells me of neotiations with France and
projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."


* Fine eyes.

"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."

"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face aain becomin
smooth as a sin that the conversation was at an end.

When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and frarant pillows, he
felt that the battle of which he had brouht tidins was far, far away
from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's
new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the
Emperor Francis occupied his thouhts.

He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonadin, of musketry
and the rattlin of carriae wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
aain drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descendin the hill,
the French were firin, and he felt his heart palpitatin as he rode
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistlin all around,
and he experienced tenfold the joy of livin, as he had not done since
childhood.

He woke up...

"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smilin happily to himself like
a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.




CHAPTER XI

Next day he woke late. Recallin his recent impressions, the first
thouht that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented to
the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last niht's conversation. Havin
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he had
not worn for a lon time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated,
and handsome, with his hand bandaed. In the study were four entlemen
of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kurain, who was a
secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin
introduced him to the others.

The entlemen assembled at Bilibin's were youn, wealthy, ay society
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their
leader, called les notres. * This set, consistin almost exclusively of
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothin to do with
war or politics but related to hih society, to certain women, and to
the official side of the service. These entlemen received Prince Andrew
as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
jests and ossip.


* Ours.

"But the best of it was," said one, tellin of the misfortune of a
fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to reard it.
Can you fancy the fiure he cut?..."

"But the worst of it, entlemen--I am ivin Kurain away to you--is
that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is takin
advantae of it!"

Prince Hippolyte was lollin in a loune chair with his les over its
arm. He bean to lauh.

"Tell me about that!" he said.

"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.

"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turnin to Prince Andrew,
"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the
Russian army) are nothin compared to what this man has been doin amon
the women!"

"La femme est la compane de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and
bean lookin throuh a lornette at his elevated les.


* "Woman is man's companion."

Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out lauhin in Hippolyte's face,
and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he had
almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.

"Oh, I must ive you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kurain
is exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his ravity!"

He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinklin his forehead bean talkin to
him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others athered round these
two.

"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feelin of alliance," bean
Hippolyte azin round with importance at the others, "without
expressin... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless
His Majesty the Emperor deroates from the principle of our alliance...

"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizin him by
the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stroner than
nonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end." And
he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished.

"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy olden
mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
satisfaction.

Everybody lauhed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
lauhter that convulsed his usually impassive features.

"Well now, entlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my uest in this
house and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, with
all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy,
but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and I
be you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You can
undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course the
women."

"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"
kissin his finer tips.

"In eneral we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane
interests," said Bilibin.

"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,
entlemen, it is already time for me to o," replied Prince Andrew
lookin at his watch.

"Where to?"

"To the Emperor."

"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back
early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."

"When speakin to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,
accompanyin him to the hall.

"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, I
can't," replied Bolkonski, smilin.

"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for ivin
audiences, but he does not like talkin himself and can't do it, as you
will see."




CHAPTER XII

At the levee Prince Andrew stood amon the Austrian officers as he had
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
face and just nodded to him with his lon head. But after it was over,
the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to ive him an audience. The Emperor
Francis received him standin in the middle of the room. Before the
conversation bean Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
seemed confused and blushed as if not knowin what to say.

"Tell me, when did the battle bein?" he asked hurriedly.

Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke
as if his sole aim were to put a iven number of questions--the answers
to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.

"At what o'clock did the battle bein?" asked the Emperor.

"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle bean at the
front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack bean after five in
the afternoon," replied Bolkonski rowin more animated and expectin
that he would have a chance to ive a reliable account, which he had
ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled
and interrupted him.

"How many miles?"

"From where to where, Your Majesty?"

"From Durrenstein to Krems."

"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."

"The French have abandoned the left bank?"

"Accordin to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts durin the
niht."

"Is there sufficient forae in Krems?"

"Forae has not been supplied to the extent..."

The Emperor interrupted him.

"At what o'clock was eneral Schmidt killed?"

"At seven o'clock, I believe."

"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"

The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw
friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached
him for not havin stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.
The Minister of War came up and conratulated him on the Maria Theresa
Order of the third rade, which the Emperor was conferrin on him. The
Empress' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess
also wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a few
seconds collected his thouhts. Then the Russian ambassador took him by
the shoulder, led him to the window, and bean to talk to him.

Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brouht was joyfully
received. A thanksivin service was arraned, Kutuzov was awarded the
rand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole mornin
callin on the principal Austrian dinitaries. Between four and five in
the afternoon, havin made all his calls, he was returnin to Bilibin's
house thinkin out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit
to Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luae. Franz,
Bilibin's man, was drain a portmanteau with some difficulty out of
the front door.

Before returnin to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had one to a bookshop to
provide himself with some books for the campain, and had spent some
time in the shop.

"What is it?" he asked.

"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rollin the
portmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The
scoundrel is aain at our heels!"

"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.

Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.

"There now! Confess that this is delihtful," said he. "This affair of
the Thabor Bride, at Vienna.... They have crossed without strikin a
blow!"

Prince Andrew could not understand.

"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town
knows?"

"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothin there."

"And you didn't see that everybody is packin up?"

"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.

"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bride that
Auersper was defendin, and the bride was not blown up: so Murat is
now rushin alon the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."

"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bride, if it was mined?"

"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."

Bolkonski shrued his shoulders.

"But if the bride is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It
will be cut off," said he.

"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered Vienna
as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
entlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard, mount
and ride to the bride. (Observe that all three are ascons.)
'entlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bride is mined and
doubly mined and that there are menacin fortifications at its head and
an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bride
and not let us cross? But it will please our soverein the Emperor
Napoleon if we take this bride, so let us three o and take it!' 'Yes,
let's!' say the others. And off they o and take the bride, cross it,
and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marchin
on us, you, and your lines of communication."


* The marshalls.

"Stop jestin," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
rieved him and yet he was pleased.

As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless
situation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it
out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!
Listenin to Bilibin he was already imainin how on reachin the army
he would ive an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
executin of the plan.

"Stop this jestin," he said.

"I am not jestin," Bilibin went on. "Nothin is truer or sadder. These
entlemen ride onto the bride alone and wave white handkerchiefs; they
assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to
neotiate with Prince Auersper. He lets them enter the tête-de-pont. *
They spin him a thousand asconades, sayin that the war is over, that
the Emperor Francis is arranin a meetin with Bonaparte, that they
desire to see Prince Auersper, and so on. The officer sends for
Auersper; these entlemen embrace the officers, crack jokes, sit on the
cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion ets to the bride unobserved,
flins the bas of incendiary material into the water, and approaches
the tête-de-pont. At lenth appears the lieutenant eneral, our dear
Prince Auersper von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the
Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can
shake one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience
to make Prince Auersper's acquaintance.' In a word, those entlemen,
ascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is so
flattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals,
and so dazzled by the siht of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'il
n'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur
l'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did not
foret to pause after this mot to ive time for its due appreciation.
"The French battalion rushes to the bridehead, spikes the uns, and the
bride is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitement
subsidin under the delihtful interest of his own story, "is that the
sereant in chare of the cannon which was to ive the sinal to fire
the mines and blow up the bride, this sereant, seein that the French
troops were runnin onto the bride, was about to fire, but Lannes
stayed his hand. The sereant, who was evidently wiser than his eneral,
oes up to Auersper and says: 'Prince, you are bein deceived, here are
the French!' Murat, seein that all is lost if the sereant is allowed
to speak, turns to Auersper with feined astonishment (he is a true
ascon) and says: 'I don't reconize the world-famous Austrian
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was
a stroke of enius. Prince Auersper feels his dinity at stake and
orders the sereant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
of the Thabor Bride is delihtful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
rascality...."


* Bridehead.

* (2) That their fire ets into his eyes and he forets that he ouht to
be firin at the enemy.

"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imainin the ray
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of unpowder, the sounds of firin, and the
lory that awaited him.

"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a liht," replied
Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just as
at Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be tryin to find the riht
expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes (It is... it is
a bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feelin that he had
produced a ood epiram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sin of pleasure, and with a
sliht smile he bean to examine his nails.

"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen
and was oin toward his room.

"I am oin away."

"Where to?"

"To the army."

"But you meant to stay another two days?"

"But now I am off at once."

And Prince Andrew after ivin directions about his departure went to
his room.

"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin followin him, "I have been
thinkin about you. Why are you oin?"

And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles
vanished from his face.

Prince Andrew looked inquirinly at him and ave no reply.

"Why are you oin? I know you think it your duty to allop back to the
army now that it is in daner. I understand that. Mon cher, it is
heroism!"

"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.

"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other
side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no loner fit for
anythin else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and o with us wherever our
ill luck takes us. They say we are oin to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very
decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche."

"Do stop jokin, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.

"I am speakin sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are you
oin, when you miht remain here? You are faced by one of two thins,"
and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reach
your reiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and
disrace with Kutuzov's whole army."

And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feelin that the dilemma was
insoluble.

"I cannot arue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thouht:
"I am oin to save the army."

"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.




CHAPTER XIII

That same niht, havin taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski
set off to rejoin the army, not knowin where he would find it and
fearin to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.

In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packin up, and the heavy
baae was already bein dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
Andrew struck the hih road alon which the Russian army was movin with
reat haste and in the reatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
with carts that it was impossible to et by in a carriae. Prince Andrew
took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hunry and
weary, makin his way past the baae waons, rode in search of the
commander-in-chief and of his own luae. Very sinister reports of the
position of the army reached him as he went alon, and the appearance of
the troops in their disorderly fliht confirmed these rumors.

"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Anleterre a transportee des extremites
de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort de
l'armee d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address to
his army at the beinnin of the campain, and they awoke in him
astonishment at the enius of his hero, a feelin of wounded pride, and
a hope of lory. "And should there be nothin left but to die?" he
thouht. "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others."


* "That Russian army which has been brouht from the ends of the earth
by Enlish old, we shall cause to share the same fate--(the fate of the
army at Ulm)."

He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,
carts, uns, artillery, and aain baae waons and vehicles of all
kinds overtakin one another and blockin the muddy road, three and
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creakin of carts and
un carriaes, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
urin of horses, and the swearin of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
All alon the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
sat waitin for somethin, and aain soldiers stralin from their
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neihborin villaes, or
returned from them drain sheep, fowls, hay, and bulin sacks. At
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
din of shoutin more incessant. Soldiers flounderin knee-deep in mud
pushed the uns and waons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
traces broke, and luns were strained with shoutin. The officers
directin the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
that they despaired of the possibility of checkin this disorder.

"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thouht Bolkonski, recallin
Bilibin's words.

Wishin to find out where the commander-in-chief was, he rode up to a
convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strane one-horse vehicle,
evidently ried up by soldiers out of any available materials and
lookin like somethin between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. A
soldier was drivin, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up and
was just puttin his question to a soldier when his attention was
diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An
officer in chare of transport was beatin the soldier who was drivin
the woman's vehicle for tryin to et ahead of others, and the strokes
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipae. The woman screamed
piercinly. Seein Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
and, wavin her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:

"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect me!
What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
Chasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
our people..."

"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the anry officer to the
soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"

"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the
doctor's wife.

"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince
Andrew ridin up to the officer.

The officer lanced at him, and without replyin turned aain to the
soldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"

"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressin his
lips.

"And who are you?" cried the officer, turnin on him with tipsy rae,
"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not you!
o back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. This
expression evidently pleased him.

"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from
behind.

Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless, tipsy
rae when a man does not know what he is sayin. He saw that his
championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap miht expose him to
what he dreaded more than anythin in the world--to ridicule; but his
instinct ured him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince
Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his
ridin whip.

"Kind...ly let--them--pass!"

The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.

"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this
disorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."

Prince Andrew without liftin his eyes rode hastily away from the
doctor's wife, who was callin him her deliverer, and recallin with a
sense of disust the minutest details of this humiliatin scene he
alloped on to the villae where he was told that the commander-in-chief
was.

On reachin the villae he dismounted and went to the nearest house,
intendin to rest if but for a moment, eat somethin, and try to sort
out the stinin and tormentin thouhts that confused his mind. "This
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinkin as he went up
to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
name.

He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little
window. Nesvitski, movin his moist lips as he chewed somethin, and
flourishin his arm, called him to enter.

"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.

Enterin the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant
havin somethin to eat. They hastily turned round to him askin if he
had any news. On their familiar faces he read aitation and alarm. This
was particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually lauhin countenance.

"Where is the commander-in-chief?" asked Bolkonski.

"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.

"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.

"I was oin to ask you. I know nothin except that it was all I could
do to et here."

"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wron to lauh at Mack, we're
ettin it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have
somethin to eat."

"You won't be able to find either your baae or anythin else now,
Prince. And od only knows where your man Peter is," said the other
adjutant.

"Where are headquarters?"

"We are to spend the niht in Znaim."

"Well, I have ot all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski.
"They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemian
mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter
with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticin that
Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.

"It's nothin," replied Prince Andrew.

He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and
the convoy officer.

"What is the commander-in-chief doin here?" he asked.

"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.

"Well, all I can make out is that everythin is abominable, abominable,
quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house
where the commander-in-chief was.

Passin by Kutuzov's carriae and the exhausted saddle horses of his
suite, with their Cossacks who were talkin loudly toether, Prince
Andrew entered the passae. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
house with Prince Baration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
eneral who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passae little Kozlovski was
squattin on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
up, was hastily writin at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face
looked worn--he too had evidently not slept all niht. He lanced at
Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.

"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictatin to the
clerk. "The Kiev renadiers, Podolian..."

"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, lancin anrily
and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.

Throuh the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
Kozlovski were squattin on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
in chief, and from the noisy lauhter of the Cossacks holdin the horses
near the window, Prince Andrew felt that somethin important and
disastrous was about to happen.

He turned to Kozlovski with urent questions.

"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Baration."

"What about capitulation?"

"Nothin of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."

Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard. Just
as he was oin to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and
Kutuzov with his eale nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
Prince Andrew stood riht in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the
commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with
thouhts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked
straiht at his adjutant's face without reconizin him.

"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.

"One moment, your excellency."

Baration, a aunt middle-aed man of medium heiht with a firm,
impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander-in-chief.

"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew rather
loudly, handin Kutuzov an envelope.

"Ah, from Vienna? Very ood. Later, later!"

Kutuzov went out into the porch with Baration.

"Well, ood-by, Prince," said he to Baration. "My blessin, and may
Christ be with you in your reat endeavor!"

His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left
hand he drew Baration toward him, and with his riht, on which he wore
a rin, he made the sin of the cross over him with a esture evidently
habitual, offerin his puffy cheek, but Baration kissed him on the neck
instead.

"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriae.
"et in with me," said he to Bolkonski.

"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain
with Prince Baration's detachment."

"et in," said Kutuzov, and noticin that Bolkonski still delayed, he
added: "I need ood officers myself, need them myself!"

They ot into the carriae and drove for a few minutes in silence.

"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's
penetration he understood all that was passin in Bolkonski's mind. "If
a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank od," he added as
if speakin to himself.

Prince Andrew lanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
socket. "Yes, he has a riht to speak so calmly of those men's death,"
thouht Bolkonski.

"That is why I be to be sent to that detachment," he said.

Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forotten what he had been
sayin, and sat pluned in thouht. Five minutes later, ently swayin
on the soft sprins of the carriae, he turned to Prince Andrew. There
was not a trace of aitation on his face. With delicate irony he
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concernin the Krems
affair, and about some ladies they both knew.




CHAPTER XIV

On November 1 Kutuzov had received, throuh a spy, news that the army he
commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that the
French, after crossin the bride at Vienna, were advancin in immense
force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were
arrivin from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely
and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find
himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon
the road connectin him with the troops arrivin from Russia, he would
have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains,
defendin himself aainst superior forces of the enemy and abandonin
all hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat
alon the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arrivin
from Russia, he risked bein forestalled on that road by the French who
had crossed the Vienna bride, and encumbered by his baae and
transport, havin to accept battle on the march aainst an enemy three
times as stron, who would hem him in from two sides.

Kutuzov chose this latter course.

The French, the spy reported, havin crossed the Vienna bride, were
advancin by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off
on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the French,
there would be reat hope of savin the army; to let the French
forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a
disrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
Russians from Krems to Znaim.

The niht he received the news, Kutuzov sent Baration's vanuard, four
thousand stron, to the riht across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to
the Vienna-Znaim road. Baration was to make this march without restin,
and to halt facin Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded in
forestallin the French he was to delay them as lon as possible.
Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.

Marchin thirty miles that stormy niht across roadless hills, with his
hunry, ill-shod soldiers, and losin a third of his men as stralers
by the way, Baration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn a
few hours ahead of the French who were approachin Hollabrunn from
Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Baration with his four thousand
hunry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army
that came upon him at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a
freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
that had placed the Vienna bride in the hands of the French without a
fiht led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meetin
Baration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the
arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna, and
with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
armies should remain in position without movin. Murat declared that
neotiations for peace were already proceedin, and that he therefore
offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, the
Austrian eneral occupyin the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary
and retired, leavin Baration's division exposed. Another emissary rode
to the Russian line to announce the peace neotiations and to offer the
Russian army the three days' truce. Baration replied that he was not
authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to
Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.

A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of ainin time, ivin Baration's
exhausted troops some rest, and lettin the transport and heavy convoys
(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but one
stae nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce ave the only, and a quite
unexpected, chance of savin the army. On receivin the news he
immediately dispatched Adjutant eneral Wintzinerode, who was in
attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzinerode was not merely to
aree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
movements of the baae trains of the entire army alon the Krems-Znaim
road. Baration's exhausted and hunry detachment, which alone covered
this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remain
stationary in face of an enemy eiht times as stron as itself.

Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in
no way bindin) miht ive time for part of the transport to pass, and
also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved correct.
As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from
Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and a
capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the followin letter to
Murat:

Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,

at eiht o'clock in the mornin

To PRINCE MURAT,

I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only
my advance uard, and have no riht to arrane an armistice without my
order. You are causin me to lose the fruits of a campain. Break the
armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
eneral who sined that capitulation had no riht to do so, and that no
one but the Emperor of Russia has that riht.

If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
army.... You are in a position to seize its baae and artillery.

The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothin
when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians let
themselves be tricked at the crossin of the Vienna bride, you are
lettin yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.

NAPOLEON

Bonaparte's adjutant rode full allop with this menacin letter to
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trustin to his enerals, moved with all
the uards to the field of battle, afraid of lettin a ready victim
escape, and Baration's four thousand men merrily lihted campfires,
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porride for the first time
for three days, and not one of them knew or imained what was in store
for him.




CHAPTER XV

Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at runth and reported
himself to Baration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's
detachment and the battle had not yet beun. In Baration's detachment
no one knew anythin of the eneral position of affairs. They talked of
peace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked of a battle
but also disbelieved in the nearness of an enaement. Baration,
knowin Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him
with distinction and special marks of favor, explainin to him that
there would probably be an enaement that day or the next, and ivin
him full liberty to remain with him durin the battle or to join the
rearuard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
important."

"However, there will hardly be an enaement today," said Baration as
if to reassure Prince Andrew.

"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal
he can et his reward just as well in the rearuard, but if he wishes to
stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"
thouht Baration. Prince Andrew, without replyin, asked the prince's
permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the
forces, so as to know his bearins should he be sent to execute an
order. The officer on duty, a handsome, eleantly dressed man with a
diamond rin on his forefiner, who was fond of speakin French thouh
he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.

On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who
seemed to be seekin somethin, and soldiers drain doors, benches,
and fencin from the villae.

"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer
pointin to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And
there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This
mornin I turned them all out and now look, it's full aain. I must o
there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a moment."

"Yes, let's o in and I will et myself a roll and some cheese," said
Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anythin.

"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you somethin."

They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and
weary faces, were sittin at the table eatin and drinkin.

"Now what does this mean, entlemen?" said the staff officer, in the
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thin more than
once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The prince
ave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he
turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots
(he had iven them to the canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockins,
rose when they entered, smilin not altoether comfortably.

"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued.
"One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a ood
example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be sounded
and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The staff
officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, entlemen, all of you,
all!" he added in a tone of command.

Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
Tushin, who silent and smilin, shiftin from one stockined foot to the
other, lanced inquirinly with his lare, intellient, kindly eyes from
Prince Andrew to the staff officer.

"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushin
smilin shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishin to adopt
a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest was
unacceptable and had not come off. He rew confused.

"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer tryin to preserve
his ravity.

Prince Andrew lanced aain at the artillery officer's small fiure.
There was somethin peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
but extremely attractive.

The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.

Havin ridden beyond the villae, continually meetin and overtakin
soldiers and officers of various reiments, they saw on their left some
entrenchments bein thrown up, the freshly du clay of which showed up
red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite the
cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
spadefuls of red clay were continually bein thrown up from behind the
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
the entrenchment, and went on aain. Just behind it they came upon some
dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.

"Voila l'arement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff
officer.


* "This is a pleasure one ets in camp, Prince."

They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and bean examinin the position.

"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicatin the hihest
point. "It's in chare of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. You
can see everythin from there; let's o there, Prince."

"Thank you very much, I will o on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishin
to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble
yourself further."

The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.

The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and
cheerful were the troops. The reatest disorder and depression had been
in the baae train he had passed that mornin on the Znaim road seven
miles away from the French. At runth also some apprehension and alarm
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in their
reatcoats were raned in lines, the sereants major and company
officers were countin the men, pokin the last man in each section in
the ribs and tellin him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
the whole place were drain los and brushwood and were buildin
shelters with merry chatter and lauhter; around the fires sat others,
dressed and undressed, dryin their shirts and le bands or mendin
boots or overcoats and crowdin round the boilers and porride cookers.
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were azin eaerly at
the steamin boiler, waitin till the sample, which a quartermaster
sereant was carryin in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a lo
before his shelter, had been tasted.

Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,
crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sereant major who, tiltin
a ke, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
emptied them, rollin the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
the sereant major with brihtened expressions, lickin their lips and
wipin them on the sleeves of their reatcoats. All their faces were as
serene as if all this were happenin at home awaitin peaceful
encampment, and not within siht of the enemy before an action in which
at least half of them would be left on the field. After passin a
chasseur reiment and in the lines of the Kiev renadiers--fine fellows
busy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the reimental
commander, hiher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
out in front of a platoon of renadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
soldiers held him while two others were flourishin their switches and
strikin him reularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A
stout major was pacin up and down the line, and reardless of the
screams kept repeatin:

"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
him, he's a scoundrel. o on! o on!"

So the swishin sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural
screams, continued.

"o on, o on!" said the major.

A youn officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face
stepped away from the man and looked round inquirinly at the adjutant
as he rode by.

Prince Andrew, havin reached the front line, rode alon it. Our front
line and that of the enemy were far apart on the riht and left flanks,
but in the center where the men with a fla of truce had passed that
mornin, the lines were so near toether that the men could see one
another's faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who
formed the picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookers
who, jestin and lauhin, stared at their strane forein enemies.

Since early mornin--despite an injunction not to approach the picket
line--the officers had been unable to keep siht-seers away. The
soldiers formin the picket line, like showmen exhibitin a curiosity,
no loner looked at the French but paid attention to the siht-seers and
rew weary waitin to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
at the French.

"Look! Look there!" one soldier was sayin to another, pointin to a
Russian musketeer who had one up to the picket line with an officer and
was rapidly and excitedly talkin to a French renadier. "Hark to him
jabberin! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with
him. There now, Sidorov!"

"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was considered
an adept at French.

The soldier to whom the lauhers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrew
reconized him and stopped to listen to what he was sayin. Dolokhov had
come from the left flank where their reiment was stationed, with his
captain.

"Now then, o on, o on!" incited the officer, bendin forward and
tryin not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to
him. "More, please: more! What's he sayin?"

Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hot
dispute with the French renadier. They were naturally talkin about the
campain. The Frenchman, confusin the Austrians with the Russians, was
tryin to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all the
way from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not
surrendered but had beaten the French.

"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," said
Dolokhov.

"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the
French renadier.

The French onlookers and listeners lauhed.

"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...," * said Dolokhov.


* "On vous fera danser."

"Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?" * asked a Frenchman.


* "What's he sinin about?"

"It's ancient history," said another, uessin that it referred to a
former war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has tauht the
others..."

"Bonaparte..." bean Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.

"Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he anrily.

"The devil skin your Emperor."

And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shoulderin
his musket walked away.

"Let us o, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.

"Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now,
Sidorov, you have a try!"

Sidorov, turnin to the French, winked, and bean to jabber meaninless
sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said,
tryin to ive an expressive intonation to his voice.

"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and
ood-humored lauhter from the soldiers that it infected the French
involuntarily, so much so that the only thin left to do seemed to be to
unload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home as
quickly as possible.

But the uns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
entrenchments looked out just as menacinly, and the unlimbered cannon
confronted one another as before.




CHAPTER XVI

Havin ridden round the whole line from riht flank to left, Prince
Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had
told him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped
beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the uns an
artillery sentry was pacin up and down; he stood at attention when the
officer arrived, but at a sin resumed his measured, monotonous pacin.
Behind the uns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes
and artillerymen's bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthest
cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the
sound of officers' voices in eaer conversation.

It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the
reater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just facin
it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the villae of Schon rabern
could be seen, and in three places to left and riht the French troops
amid the smoke of their campfires, the reater part of whom were
evidently in the villae itself and behind the hill. To the left from
that villae, amid the smoke, was somethin resemblin a battery, but it
was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our riht flank was
posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position.
Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
draoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from which
Prince Andrew was surveyin the position, was the easiest and most
direct descent and ascent to the brook separatin us from Schon rabern.
On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked the
bonfires of our infantry who were fellin wood. The French line was
wider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us on
both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, makin it
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took out
his notebook and, leanin on the cannon, sketched a plan of the
position. He made some notes on two points, intendin to mention them to
Baration. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in the
center, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the
dip. Prince Andrew, bein always near the commander in chief, closely
followin the mass movements and eneral orders, and constantly studyin
historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the
course of events in the forthcomin action in broad outline. He imained
only important possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the riht flank," he
said to himself, "the Kiev renadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must
hold their position till reserves from the center come up. In that case
the draoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. If they
attack our center we, havin the center battery on this hih round,
shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip by
echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the un,
he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happens
had not understood a word of what they were sayin. Suddenly, however,
he was struck by a voice comin from the shed, and its tone was so
sincere that he could not but listen.

"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what is
beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."

Another, a youner voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can't
escape it anyhow."

"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly
voice interruptin them both. "Of course you artillery men are very
wise, because you can take everythin alon with you--vodka and snacks."

And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,
lauhed.

"Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of the familiar
voice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whatever we may
say about the soul oin to the sky... we know there is no sky but only
an atmosphere."

The manly voice aain interrupted the artillery officer.

"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.

"Why," thouht Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in the
sutler's hut without his boots." He reconized the areeable,
philosophizin voice with pleasure.

"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a
future life..."

He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer and
nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it
had not finished sayin what was necessary, thudded into the round near
the shed with super human force, throwin up a mass of earth. The round
seemed to roan at the terrible impact.

And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and
his kind, intellient face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followed
by the owner of the manly voice, a dashin infantry officer who hurried
off to his company, buttonin up his coat as he ran.




CHAPTER XVII

Mountin his horse aain Prince Andrew linered with the battery,
lookin at the puff from the un that had sent the ball. His eyes ran
rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a
battery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two
mounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were allopin up the hill. A
small but distinctly visible enemy column was movin down the hill,
probably to strenthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot had
not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.
The battle had beun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and alloped back
to runth to find Prince Baration. He heard the cannonade behind him
rowin louder and more frequent. Evidently our uns had beun to reply.
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
the report of musketry.

Lemarrois had just arrived at a allop with Bonaparte's stern letter,
and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once
moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian
wins, hopin before evenin and before the arrival of the Emperor to
crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.

"It has beun. Here it is!" thouht Prince Andrew, feelin the blood
rush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"

Passin between the companies that had been eatin porride and drinkin
vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapid
movement of soldiers formin ranks and ettin their muskets ready, and
on all their faces he reconized the same eaerness that filled his
heart. "It has beun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what the
face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.

Before he had reached the embankments that were bein thrown up, he saw,
in the liht of the dull autumn evenin, mounted men comin toward him.
The foremost, wearin a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and ridin a
white horse, was Prince Baration. Prince Andrew stopped, waitin for
him to come up; Prince Baration reined in his horse and reconizin
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
told him what he had seen.

The feelin, "It has beun! Here it is!" was seen even on Prince
Baration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.
Prince Andrew azed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and
wished he could tell what, if anythin, this man was thinkin and
feelin at that moment. "Is there anythin at all behind that impassive
face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince Baration bent
his head in sin of areement with what Prince Andrew told him, and
said, "Very ood!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everythin that
took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.
Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly. Prince
Baration, utterin his words with an Oriental accent, spoke
particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need to
hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin's
battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind Prince Baration
rode an officer of the suite, the prince's personal adjutant, Zherkov,
an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty, ridin a fine bobtailed
horse, and a civilian--an accountant who had asked permission to be
present at the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a stout, full-
faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction and
presented a strane appearance amon the hussars, Cossacks, and
adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy
officer's saddle.

"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointin to the
accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already."

"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beamin but rather cunnin
smile, as if flattered at bein made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and
purposely tryin to appear stupider than he really was.

"It is very strane, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer. (He
remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressin a
prince, but could not et it quite riht.)

By this time they were all approachin Tushin's battery, and a ball
struck the round in front of them.

"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile.

"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.

"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"

He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speakin
when they aain heard an unexpectedly violent whistlin which suddenly
ended with a thud into somethin soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, ridin
a little to their riht and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with
his horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and
turned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facin the Cossack,
and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
horse still struled.

Prince Baration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seein the
cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is
it worth while noticin trifles?" He reined in his horse with the care
of a skillful rider and, slihtly bendin over, disenaed his saber
which had cauht in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of a kind
no loner in eneral use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov
ivin his saber to Baration in Italy, and the recollection was
particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery at
which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.

"Whose company?" asked Prince Baration of an artilleryman standin by
the ammunition waon.

He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you frihtened
here?" and the artilleryman understood him.

"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckled
unner in a merry voice, standin to attention.

"Yes, yes," muttered Baration as if considerin somethin, and he rode
past the limbers to the farthest cannon.

As he approached, a rinin shot issued from it deafenin him and his
suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the un they could see
the unners who had seized it strainin to roll it quickly back to its
former position. A hue, broad-shouldered unner, Number One, holdin a
mop, his les far apart, spran to the wheel; while Number Two with a
tremblin hand placed a chare in the cannon's mouth. The short, round-
shouldered Captain Tushin, stumblin over the tail of the un carriae,
moved forward and, not noticin the eneral, looked out shadin his eyes
with his small hand.

"Lift it two lines more and it will be just riht," cried he in a feeble
voice to which he tried to impart a dashin note, ill-suited to his weak
fiure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"

Baration called to him, and Tushin, raisin three finers to his cap
with a bashful and awkward esture not at all like a military salute but
like a priest's benediction, approached the eneral. Thouh Tushin's
uns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firin incendiary
balls at the villae of Schon rabern visible just opposite, in front of
which lare masses of French were advancin.

No one had iven Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but after
consultin his sereant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had reat
respect, he had decided that it would be a ood thin to set fire to the
villae. "Very ood!" said Baration in reply to the officer's report,
and bean deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended before
him. The French had advanced nearest on our riht. Below the heiht on
which the Kiev reiment was stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet
flowed, the soul-stirrin rollin and cracklin of musketry was heard,
and much farther to the riht beyond the draoons, the officer of the
suite pointed out to Baration a French column that was outflankin us.
To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Baration
ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the riht
flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that if
these battalions went away, the uns would remain without support.
Prince Baration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at
him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was
just and that really no answer could be made to it. But at that moment
an adjutant alloped up with a messae from the commander of the
reiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French were
comin down upon them and that his reiment was in disorder and was
retreatin upon the Kiev renadiers. Prince Baration bowed his head in
sin of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to the riht and sent
an adjutant to the draoons with orders to attack the French. But this
adjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander of
the draoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the round, as a
heavy fire had been opened on him and he was losin men uselessly, and
so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood.

"Very ood!" said Baration.

As he was leavin the battery, firin was heard on the left also, and as
it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to o there
himself, Prince Baration sent Zherkov to tell the eneral in command
(the one who had paraded his reiment before Kutuzov at Braunau) that he
must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear, as
the riht flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy's
attack very lon. About Tushin and the battalion that had been in
support of his battery all was forotten. Prince Andrew listened
attentively to Baration's colloquies with the commandin officers and
the orders he ave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders were
really iven, but that Prince Baration tried to make it appear that
everythin done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of subordinate
commanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least in accord
with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that thouh what
happened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,
owin to the tact Baration showed, his presence was very valuable.
Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm;
soldiers and officers reeted him aily, rew more cheerful in his
presence, and were evidently anxious to display their courae before
him.




CHAPTER XVIII

Prince Baration, havin reached the hihest point of our riht flank,
bean ridin downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where
on account of the smoke nothin could be seen. The nearer they ot to
the hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearness
of the actual battlefield. They bean to meet wounded men. One with a
bleedin head and no cap was bein draed alon by two soldiers who
supported him under the arms. There was a urle in his throat and he
was spittin blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat or
mouth. Another was walkin sturdily by himself but without his musket,
roanin aloud and swinin his arm which had just been hurt, while
blood from it was streamin over his reatcoat as from a bottle. He had
that moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than sufferin.
Crossin a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men lyin
on the round; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom were
unwounded. The soldiers were ascendin the hill breathin heavily, and
despite the eneral's presence were talkin loudly and esticulatin. In
front of them rows of ray cloaks were already visible throuh the
smoke, and an officer catchin siht of Baration rushed shoutin after
the crowd of retreatin soldiers, orderin them back. Baration rode up
to the ranks alon which shots crackled now here and now there, drownin
the sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked with
smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Some
were usin their ramrods, others puttin powder on the touchpans or
takin chares from their pouches, while others were firin, thouh who
they were firin at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no
wind to carry away. A pleasant hummin and whistlin of bullets were
often heard. "What is this?" thouht Prince Andrew approachin the crowd
of soldiers. "It can't be an attack, for they are not movin; it can't
be a square--for they are not drawn up for that."

The commander of the reiment, a thin, feeble-lookin old man with a
pleasant smile--his eyelids droopin more than half over his old eyes,
ivin him a mild expression, rode up to Baration and welcomed him as a
host welcomes an honored uest. He reported that his reiment had been
attacked by French cavalry and that, thouh the attack had been
repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack had
been repulsed, employin this military term to describe what had
occurred to his reiment, but in reality he did not himself know what
had happened durin that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, and
could not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his
reiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement of
the action balls and shells bean flyin all over his reiment and
hittin men and that afterwards someone had shouted "Cavalry!" and our
men had beun firin. They were still firin, not at the cavalry which
had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow and
were firin at our men. Prince Baration bowed his head as a sin that
this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turnin to his
adjutant he ordered him to brin down the two battalions of the Sixth
Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by the
chaned expression on Prince Baration's face at this moment. It
expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of a
man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunin into the water.
The dull, sleepy expression was no loner there, nor the affectation of
profound thouht. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before him
eaerly and rather disdainfully, not restin on anythin althouh his
movements were still slow and measured.

The commander of the reiment turned to Prince Baration, entreatin him
to o back as it was too danerous to remain where they were. "Please,
your excellency, for od's sake!" he kept sayin, lancin for support
at an officer of the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!"
and he drew attention to the bullets whistlin, sinin, and hissin
continually around them. He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproach
that a carpenter uses to a entleman who has picked up an ax: "We are
used to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands." He spoke as if those
bullets could not kill him, and his half-closed eyes ave still more
persuasiveness to his words. The staff officer joined in the colonel's
appeals, but Baration did not reply; he only ave an order to cease
firin and re-form, so as to ive room for the two approachin
battalions. While he was speakin, the curtain of smoke that had
concealed the hollow, driven by a risin wind, bean to move from riht
to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, with
the French movin about on it, opened out before them. All eyes fastened
involuntarily on this French column advancin aainst them and windin
down over the uneven round. One could already see the soldiers' shay
caps, distinuish the officers from the men, and see the standard
flappin aainst its staff.

"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Baration's suite.

The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clash
would take place on this side of it...

The remains of our reiment which had been in action rapidly formed up
and moved to the riht; from behind it, dispersin the laards, came
two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had
reached Baration, the weihty tread of the mass of men marchin in step
could be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Baration, marched a
company commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happy
expression--the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At that
moment he was clearly thinkin of nothin but how dashin a fellow he
would appear as he passed the commander.

With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lihtly with
his muscular les as if sailin alon, stretchin himself to his full
heiht without the smallest effort, his ease contrastin with the heavy
tread of the soldiers who were keepin step with him. He carried close
to his le a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a real
weapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the men
without losin step, his whole powerful body turnin flexibly. It was as
if all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passin the commander
in the best possible manner, and feelin that he was doin it well he
was happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed to repeat to himself at
each alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but varied faces,
the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in
step, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeatin
to himself at each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat major
skirted a bush, puffin and fallin out of step; a soldier who had
fallen behind, his face showin alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,
pantin to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleavin the air,
flew over the heads of Baration and his suite, and fell into the column
to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the company
commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a semicircle
round somethin where the ball had fallen, and an old trooper on the
flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the dead men,
ran to catch up his line and, fallin into step with a hop, looked back
anrily, and throuh the ominous silence and the reular tramp of feet
beatin the round in unison, one seemed to hear left... left... left.

"Well done, lads!" said Prince Baration.

"lad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout from the
ranks. A morose soldier marchin on the left turned his eyes on
Baration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We know
that ourselves!" Another, without lookin round, as thouh fearin to
relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.

The order was iven to halt and down knapsacks.

Baration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted.
He ave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat,
stretched his les, and set his cap straiht. The head of the French
column, with its officers leadin, appeared from below the hill.

"Forward, with od!" said Baration, in a resolute, sonorous voice,
turnin for a moment to the front line, and slihtly swinin his arms,
he went forward uneasily over the rouh field with the awkward ait of a
cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leadin him
forward, and experienced reat happiness.

The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walkin beside Baration,
could clearly distinuish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their
faces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with aitered les
and turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince Baration
ave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of the
ranks. Suddenly one shot after another ran out from the French, smoke
appeared all alon their uneven ranks, and musket shots sounded. Several
of our men fell, amon them the round-faced officer who had marched so
aily and complacently. But at the moment the first report was heard,
Baration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"

"Hurrah--ah!--ah!" ran a lon-drawn shout from our ranks, and passin
Baration and racin one another they rushed in an irreular but joyous
and eaer crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.




CHAPTER XIX

The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our riht
flank. In the center Tushin's forotten battery, which had manaed to
set fire to the Schon rabern villae, delayed the French advance. The
French were puttin out the fire which the wind was spreadin, and thus
ave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side
of the dip in the round at the rear was hurried and noisy, but the
different companies did not et mixed. But our left--which consisted of
the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlorad hussars--was
simultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under
Lannes and was thrown into confusion. Baration had sent Zherkov to the
eneral commandin that left flank with orders to retreat immediately.

Zherkov, not removin his hand from his cap, turned his horse about and
alloped off. But no sooner had he left Baration than his courae
failed him. He was seized by panic and could not o where it was
danerous.

Havin reached the left flank, instead of oin to the front where the
firin was, he bean to look for the eneral and his staff where they
could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.

The command of the left flank beloned by seniority to the commander of
the reiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was
servin as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been
assined to the commander of the Pavlorad reiment in which Rostov was
servin, and a misunderstandin arose. The two commanders were much
exasperated with one another and, lon after the action had beun on the
riht flank and the French were already advancin, were enaed in
discussion with the sole object of offendin one another. But the
reiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for the
impendin action. From privates to eneral they were not expectin a
battle and were enaed in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feedin the
horses and the infantry collectin wood.

"He hiher iss dan I in rank," said the erman colonel of the hussars,
flushin and addressin an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him do
what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Buler, sount ze
retreat!"

But haste was becomin imperative. Cannon and musketry, minlin
toether, thundered on the riht and in the center, while the capotes of
Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossin the milldam and formin
up within twice the rane of a musket shot. The eneral in command of
the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and havin mounted
drew himself up very straiht and tall and rode to the Pavlorad
commander. The commanders met with polite bows but with secret
malevolence in their hearts.

"Once aain, Colonel," said the eneral, "I can't leave half my men in
the wood. I be of you, I be of you," he repeated, "to occupy the
position and prepare for an attack."

"I pe of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly
replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."

"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian eneral and if you
are not aware of the fact..."

"Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touchin
his horse and turnin purple in the face. "Vill you be so oot to come
to ze front and see dat zis position iss no oot? I don't vish to
destroy my men for your pleasure!"

"You foret yourself, Colonel. I am not considerin my own pleasure and
I won't allow it to be said!"

Takin the colonel's outburst as a challene to his courae, the eneral
expanded his chest and rode, frownin, beside him to the front line, as
if their differences would be settled there amonst the bullets. They
reached the front, several bullets sped over them, and they halted in
silence. There was nothin fresh to be seen from the line, for from
where they had been before it had been evident that it was impossible
for cavalry to act amon the bushes and broken round, as well as that
the French were outflankin our left. The eneral and colonel looked
sternly and sinificantly at one another like two fihtin cocks
preparin for battle, each vainly tryin to detect sins of cowardice in
the other. Both passed the examination successfully. As there was
nothin to be said, and neither wished to ive occasion for it to be
alleed that he had been the first to leave the rane of fire, they
would have remained there for a lon time testin each other's courae
had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and a
muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had attacked
the men collectin wood in the copse. It was no loner possible for the
hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from the line of
retreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the position, it
was now necessary to attack in order to cut a way throuh for
themselves.

The squadron in which Rostov was servin had scarcely time to mount
before it was halted facin the enemy. Aain, as at the Enns bride,
there was nothin between the squadron and the enemy, and aain that
terrible dividin line of uncertainty and fear--resemblin the line
separatin the livin from the dead--lay between them. All were
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
it or not, and how they would cross it, aitated them all.

The colonel rode to the front, anrily ave some reply to questions put
to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insistin on havin
his own way, ave an order. No one said anythin definite, but the rumor
of an attack spread throuh the squadron. The command to form up ran
out and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.
Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussars
alike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and this
irresolution communicated itself to the men.

"If only they would be quick!" thouht Rostov, feelin that at last the
time had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so
often heard from his fellow hussars.

"Fo'ward, with od, lads!" ran out Denisov's voice. "At a twot
fo'ward!"

The horses' croups bean to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at the
reins and started of his own accord.

Before him, on the riht, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars and
still farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly but
took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off.

"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks
droopin as he broke into a allop.

Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and more
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible--and now he had
crossed that line and not only was there nothin terrible, but
everythin was becomin more and more happy and animated. "Oh, how I
will slash at him!" thouht Rostov, rippin the hilt of his saber.

"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"
thouht Rostov drivin his spurs into Rook and lettin him o at a full
allop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was already
visible. Suddenly somethin like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the
squadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant
the trooper Nikitenko, who was allopin ahead, shot away from him, and
Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward with
unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From behind him
Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted aainst him and looked anrily at
him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and alloped past.

"How is it I am not movin? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked
and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a field.
Instead of the movin horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothin before
him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There was warm
blood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is killed." Rook
tried to rise on his foreles but fell back, pinnin his rider's le.
Blood was flowin from his head; he struled but could not rise. Rostov
also tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache havin become entanled
in the saddle. Where our men were, and where the French, he did not
know. There was no one near.

Havin disentanled his le, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now the
line that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself and
could not answer. "Can somethin bad have happened to me?" he wondered
as he ot up: and at that moment he felt that somethin superfluous was
hanin on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if it were not his.
He examined his hand carefully, vainly tryin to find blood on it. "Ah,
here are people comin," he thouht joyfully, seein some men runnin
toward him. "They will help me!" In front came a man wearin a strane
shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Then
came two more, and many more runnin behind. One of them said somethin
strane, not in Russian. In amon the hindmost of these men wearin
similar shakos was a Russian hussar. He was bein held by the arms and
his horse was bein led behind him.

"It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will take
me too? Who are these men?" thouht Rostov, scarcely believin his eyes.
"Can they be French?" He looked at the approachin Frenchmen, and thouh
but a moment before he had been allopin to et at them and hack them
to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believe
his eyes. "Who are they? Why are they runnin? Can they be comin at me?
And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered his
mother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends', and the
enemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may
do it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not movin from the spot or
realizin the situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked
nose, was already so close that the expression of his face could be
seen. And the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanin down,
holdin his breath, and runnin so lihtly, frihtened Rostov. He seized
his pistol and, instead of firin it, flun it at the Frenchman and ran
with all his miht toward the bushes. He did not now run with the
feelin of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bride,
but with the feelin of a hare fleein from the hounds. One sinle
sentiment, that of fear for his youn and happy life, possessed his
whole bein. Rapidly leapin the furrows, he fled across the field with
the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then turnin his
ood-natured, pale, youn face to look back. A shudder of terror went
throuh him: "No, better not look," he thouht, but havin reached the
bushes he lanced round once more. The French had fallen behind, and
just as he looked round the first man chaned his run to a walk and,
turnin, shouted somethin loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostov
paused. "No, there's some mistake," thouht he. "They can't have wanted
to kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if a
seventy-pound weiht were tied to it. He could run no more. The
Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and stooped
down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his
last remainin strenth, took hold of his left hand with his riht, and
reached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.




CHAPTER XX

The infantry reiments that had been cauht unawares in the outskirts of
the wood ran out of it, the different companies ettin mixed, and
retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the
senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible in battle, and that word
infected the whole crowd with a feelin of panic.

"Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fuitives.

The moment he heard the firin and the cry from behind, the eneral
realized that somethin dreadful had happened to his reiment, and the
thouht that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service who had
never been to blame, miht be held responsible at headquarters for
nelience or inefficiency so staered him that, forettin the
recalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dinity as a eneral, and above
all quite forettin the daner and all reard for self-preservation, he
clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurrin his horse, alloped to
the reiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunately
missed him. His one desire was to know what was happenin and at any
cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he, an
exemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never been
censured, should not be held to blame.

Havin alloped safely throuh the French, he reached a field behind the
copse across which our men, reardless of orders, were runnin and
descendin the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides the
fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiers
attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disreardin him,
continue their fliht? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem so
terrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance
distorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishin of
his saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talkin, firin into the
air, and disobeyin orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fate
of battles was evidently culminatin in a panic.

The eneral had a fit of couhin as a result of shoutin and of the
powder smoke and stopped in despair. Everythin seemed lost. But at that
moment the French who were attackin, suddenly and without any apparent
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timokhin's company,
which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, havin lain in
ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armed
only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and
such mad, drunken determination that, taken by surprise, the French had
thrown down their muskets and run. Dolokhov, runnin beside Timokhin,
killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize the
surrenderin French officer by his collar. Our fuitives returned, the
battalions re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank
in half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able to
join up, and the fiht was at an end. The reimental commander and Major
Ekonomov had stopped beside a bride, lettin the retreatin companies
pass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander's
stirrup, almost leanin aainst him. The man was wearin a bluish coat
of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was bandaed, and
over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slun. He had an officer's
sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently
into the commander's face, and his lips were smilin. Thouh the
commander was occupied in ivin instructions to Major Ekonomov, he
could not help takin notice of the soldier.

"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointin to the
French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. I stopped the
company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abrupt
sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I be you will remember
this, your excellency!"

"All riht, all riht," replied the commander, and turned to Major
Ekonomov.

But Dolokhov did not o away; he untied the handkerchief around his
head, pulled it off, and showed the blood conealed on his hair.

"A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"

Tushin's battery had been forotten and only at the very end of the
action did Prince Baration, still hearin the cannonade in the center,
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
the battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attached
to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action by
someone's order, the battery had continued firin and was only not
captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone
could have the effrontery to continue firin from four quite undefended
uns. On the contrary, the eneretic action of that battery led the
French to suppose that here--in the center--the main Russian forces were
concentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on each
occasion had been driven back by rapeshot from the four isolated uns
on the hillock.

Soon after Prince Baration had left him, Tushin had succeeded in
settin fire to Schon rabern.

"Look at them scurryin! It's burnin! Just see the smoke! Fine! rand!
Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brihtenin
up.

All the uns, without waitin for orders, were bein fired in the
direction of the conflaration. As if urin each other on, the soldiers
cried at each shot: "Fine! That's ood! Look at it... rand!" The fire,
fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreadin. The French columns that had
advanced beyond the villae went back; but as thouh in revene for this
failure, the enemy placed ten uns to the riht of the villae and bean
firin them at Tushin's battery.

In their childlike lee, aroused by the fire and their luck in
successfully cannonadin the French, our artillerymen only noticed this
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell amon our uns, one
knockin over two horses and another tearin off a munition-waon
driver's le. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,
but only chaned character. The horses were replaced by others from a
reserve un carriae, the wounded were carried away, and the four uns
were turned aainst the ten-un battery. Tushin's companion officer had
been killed at the beinnin of the enaement and within an hour
seventeen of the forty men of the uns' crews had been disabled, but the
artillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they noticed
the French appearin below them, and then they fired rapeshot at them.

Little Tushin, movin feebly and awkwardly, kept tellin his orderly to
"refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scatterin sparks from it, ran
forward shadin his eyes with his small hand to look at the French.

"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept sayin, seizin the uns by the wheels and
workin the screws himself.

Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made him
jump, Tushin not takin his pipe from his mouth ran from un to un, now
aimin, now countin the chares, now ivin orders about replacin dead
or wounded horses and harnessin fresh ones, and shoutin in his feeble
voice, so hih pitched and irresolute. His face rew more and more
animated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn
away from the siht, shoutin anrily at the men who, as is always the
case, hesitated about liftin the injured or dead. The soldiers, for the
most part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an artillery
company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as their
officer--all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassin
situation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on
theirs.

Owin to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and
activity, Tushin did not experience the slihtest unpleasant sense of
fear, and the thouht that he miht be killed or badly wounded never
occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. It
seemed to him that it was a very lon time ao, almost a day, since he
had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the corner
of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar round. Thouh he
thouht of everythin, considered everythin, and did everythin the
best of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to
feverish delirium or drunkenness.

From the deafenin sounds of his own uns around him, the whistle and
thud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspirin faces
of the crew bustlin round the uns, from the siht of the blood of men
and horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side (always
followed by a ball flyin past and strikin the earth, a man, a un, a
horse), from the siht of all these thins a fantastic world of his own
had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded him
pleasure. The enemy's uns were in his fancy not uns but pipes from
which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.

"There... he's puffin aain," muttered Tushin to himself, as a small
cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the
wind.

"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."

"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standin close
by, who heard him mutterin.

"Nothin... only a shell..." he answered.

"Come alon, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was the
name his fancy ave to the farthest un of the battery, which was lare
and of an old pattern. The French swarmin round their uns seemed to
him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of the
second un's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than at
anyone else and took deliht in his every movement. The sound of
musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishin, now increasin,
seemed like someone's breathin. He listened intently to the ebb and
flow of these sounds.


* Dauhter of Matthew.

"Ah! Breathin aain, breathin!" he muttered to himself.

He imained himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwin
cannon balls at the French with both hands.

"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was sayin as
he moved from the un, when a strane, unfamiliar voice called above his
head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"

Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned
him out of the booth at runth. He was shoutin in a aspin voice:

"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."

"Why are they down on me?" thouht Tushin, lookin in alarm at his
superior.

"I... don't..." he muttered, holdin up two finers to his cap. "I..."

But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannon
ball, flyin close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.
He paused, and just as he was about to say somethin more, another ball
stopped him. He turned his horse and alloped off.

"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.

The soldiers lauhed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the same
order.

It was Prince Andrew. The first thin he saw on ridin up to the space
where Tushin's uns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a
broken le, that lay screamin piteously beside the harnessed horses.
Blood was ushin from its le as from a sprin. Amon the limbers lay
several dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approached
and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thouht
of bein afraid roused him aain. "I cannot be afraid," thouht he, and
dismounted slowly amon the uns. He delivered the order and did not
leave the battery. He decided to have the uns removed from their
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Toether with Tushin, steppin
across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended
to the removal of the uns.

"A staff officer was here a minute ao, but skipped off," said an
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"

Prince Andrew said nothin to Tushin. They were both so busy as to seem
not to notice one another. When havin limbered up the only two cannon
that remained uninjured out of the four, they bean movin down the hill
(one shattered un and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
up to Tushin.

"Well, till we meet aain..." he said, holdin out his hand to Tushin.

"ood-bye, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! ood-bye, my dear
fellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.




CHAPTER XXI

The wind had fallen and black clouds, merin with the powder smoke,
hun low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was rowin dark
and the low of two conflarations was the more conspicuous. The
cannonade was dyin down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on the
riht sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his uns,
continually drivin round or comin upon wounded men, was out of rane
of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,
amon them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent to
Tushin's battery but had never reached it. Interruptin one another,
they all ave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,
reprimandin and reproachin him. Tushin ave no orders, and, silently--
fearin to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep without
knowin why--rode behind on his artillery na. Thouh the orders were to
abandon the wounded, many of them draed themselves after troops and
beed for seats on the un carriaes. The jaunty infantry officer who
just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle shed was laid,
with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriae. At the foot of
the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supportin one hand with the other, came
up to Tushin and asked for a seat.

"Captain, for od's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For od's
sake... I can't walk. For od's sake!"

It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and
been refused. He asked in a hesitatin, piteous voice.

"Tell them to ive me a seat, for od's sake!"

"ive him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad," he
said, addressin his favorite soldier. "And where is the wounded
officer?"

"He has been set down. He died," replied someone.

"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,
Antonov."

The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was pale
and his jaw trembled, shiverin feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna,"
the un from which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak they
spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm.

"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approachin the un on
which Rostov sat.

"No, it's a sprain."

"Then what is this blood on the un carriae?" inquired Tushin.

"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman,
wipin away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apoloizin for the
state of his un.

It was all that they could do to et the uns up the rise aided by the
infantry, and havin reached the villae of runtersdorf they halted. It
had rown so dark that one could not distinuish the uniforms ten paces
off, and the firin had beun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the
riht, shoutin and firin were aain heard. Flashes of shot leamed in
the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers
who had sheltered in the villae houses. They all rushed out of the
villae aain, but Tushin's uns could not move, and the artillerymen,
Tushin, and the cadet exchaned silent lances as they awaited their
fate. The firin died down and soldiers, talkin eaerly, streamed out
of a side street.

"Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one.

"We've iven it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," said
another.

"You couldn't see a thin. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothin
could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there somethin to drink?"

The French had been repulsed for the last time. And aain and aain in
the complete darkness Tushin's uns moved forward, surrounded by the
hummin infantry as by a frame.

In the darkness, it seemed as thouh a loomy unseen river was flowin
always in one direction, hummin with whispers and talk and the sound of
hoofs and wheels. Amid the eneral rumble, the roans and voices of the
wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness
of the niht. The loom that enveloped the army was filled with their
roans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the niht.
After a while the movin mass became aitated, someone rode past on a
white horse followed by his suite, and said somethin in passin: "What
did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eaer
questions from all sides. The whole movin mass bean pressin closer
toether and a report spread that they were ordered to halt: evidently
those in front had halted. All remained where they were in the middle of
the muddy road.

Fires were lihted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin,
havin iven orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressin
station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire the
soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, draed himself to the
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shiverin shook his whole
body. Drowsiness was irresistibly masterin him, but he kept awake by an
excruciatin pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory
position. He kept closin his eyes and then aain lookin at the fire,
which seemed to him dazzlinly red, and at the feeble, round-shouldered
fiure of Tushin who was sittin cross-leed like a Turk beside him.
Tushin's lare, kind, intellient eyes were fixed with sympathy and
commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished
to help him but could not.

From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who
were walkin, drivin past, and settlin down all around. The sound of
voices, the trampin feet, the horses' hoofs movin in mud, the
cracklin of wood fires near and afar, mered into one tremulous rumble.

It was no loner, as before, a dark, unseen river flowin throuh the
loom, but a dark sea swellin and radually subsidin after a storm.
Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and
around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, held
his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.

"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,
your honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"

With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaed cheek came up to
the bonfire, and addressin Tushin asked him to have the uns moved a
trifle to let a waon o past. After he had one, two soldiers rushed to
the campfire. They were quarrelin and fihtin desperately, each tryin
to snatch from the other a boot they were both holdin on to.

"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them
shouted hoarsely.

Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaed with a bloodstained le
band, came up and in anry tones asked the artillerymen for water.

"Must one die like a do?" said he.

Tushin told them to ive the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ran
up, bein a little fire for the infantry.

"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! ood luck to you, fellow
countrymen. Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with interest," said
he, carryin away into the darkness a lowin stick.

Next came four soldiers, carryin somethin heavy on a cloak, and passed
by the fire. One of them stumbled.

"Who the devil has put the los on the road?" snarled he.

"He's dead--why carry him?" said another.

"Shut up!"

And they disappeared into the darkness with their load.

"Still achin?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.

"Yes."

"Your honor, you're wanted by the eneral. He is in the hut here," said
a unner, comin up to Tushin.

"Comin, friend."

Tushin rose and, buttonin his reatcoat and pullin it straiht, walked
away from the fire.

Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared for
him, Prince Baration sat at dinner, talkin with some commandin
officers who had athered at his quarters. The little old man with the
half-closed eyes was there reedily nawin a mutton bone, and the
eneral who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by a
lass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the sinet
rin, and Zherkov, uneasily lancin at them all, and Prince Andrew,
pale, with compressed lips and feverishly litterin eyes.

In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, and
the accountant with the naive face was feelin its texture, shakin his
head in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really interested him,
perhaps because it was hard for him, hunry as he was, to look on at a
dinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was a
French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our draoons. Our officers
were flockin in to look at him. Prince Baration was thankin the
individual commanders and inquirin into details of the action and our
losses. The eneral whose reiment had been inspected at Braunau was
informin the prince that as soon as the action bean he had withdrawn
from the wood, mustered the men who were woodcuttin, and, allowin the
French to pass him, had made a bayonet chare with two battalions and
had broken up the French troops.

"When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was
disoranized, I stopped in the road and thouht: 'I'll let them come on
and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'--and that's
what I did."

The eneral had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not manaed
to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps it
miht really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all that
confusion what did or did not happen?

"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he continued--
rememberin Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last interview
with the entleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was reduced to
the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence and
particularly distinuished himself."

"I saw the Pavlorad hussars attack there, your excellency," chimed in
Zherkov, lookin uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all that
day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. "They broke up
two squares, your excellency."

Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expectin one of his
usual jokes, but noticin that what he was sayin redounded to the lory
of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression,
thouh many of them knew that what he was sayin was a lie devoid of any
foundation. Prince Baration turned to the old colonel:

"entlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,
cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two uns were abandoned in the
center?" he inquired, searchin with his eyes for someone. (Prince
Baration did not ask about the uns on the left flank; he knew that all
the uns there had been abandoned at the very beinnin of the action.)
"I think I sent you?" he added, turnin to the staff officer on duty.

"One was damaed," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't
understand. I was there all the time ivin orders and had only just
left.... It is true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.

Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouackin close to the
villae and had already been sent for.

"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Baration, addressin Prince
Andrew.

"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer,
with a smile to Bolkonski.

"I had not the pleasure of seein you," said Prince Andrew, coldly and
abruptly.

All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way
timidly from behind the backs of the enerals. As he stepped past the
enerals in the crowded hut, feelin embarrassed as he always was by the
siht of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner and
stumbled over it. Several of those present lauhed.

"How was it a un was abandoned?" asked Baration, frownin, not so much
at the captain as at those who were lauhin, amon whom Zherkov lauhed
loudest.

Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his uilt
and the disrace of havin lost two uns and yet remainin alive present
themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that he
had not thouht about it until that moment. The officers' lauhter
confused him still more. He stood before Baration with his lower jaw
tremblin and was hardly able to mutter: "I don't know... your
excellency... I had no men... your excellency."

"You miht have taken some from the coverin troops."

Tushin did not say that there were no coverin troops, thouh that was
perfectly true. He was afraid of ettin some other officer into
trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Baration as a schoolboy who has
blundered looks at an examiner.

The silence lasted some time. Prince Baration, apparently not wishin
to be severe, found nothin to say; the others did not venture to
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his
finers twitched nervously.

"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
voice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. I went
there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two uns
smashed, and no supports at all."

Prince Baration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski,
who spoke with suppressed aitation.

"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he
continued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that battery
and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and without
awaitin a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.

Prince Baration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distrust
in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feelin able fully to credit it,
bent his head, and told Tushin that he could o. Prince Andrew went out
with him.

"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.

Prince Andrew ave him a look, but said nothin and went away. He felt
sad and depressed. It was all so strane, so unlike what he had hoped.

"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will all
this end?" thouht Rostov, lookin at the chanin shadows before him.
The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible
drowsiness overpowered him, red rins danced before his eyes, and the
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness mered
with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers--wounded and
unwounded--it was they who were crushin, weihin down, and twistin
the sinews and scorchin the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. To
rid himself of them he closed his eyes.

For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable thins
appeared to him in a dream: his mother and her lare white hand, Sonya's
thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and lauhter, Denisov with his
voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and
Bodanich. That affair was the same thin as this soldier with the harsh
voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so aonizinly,
incessantly pullin and pressin his arm and always drain it in one
direction. He tried to et away from them, but they would not for an
instant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth. It would not ache--it
would be well--if only they did not pull it, but it was impossible to
et rid of them.

He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of niht hun less
than a yard above the low of the charcoal. Flakes of fallin snow were
flutterin in that liht. Tushin had not returned, the doctor had not
come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sittin naked at
the other side of the fire, warmin his thin yellow body.

"Nobody wants me!" thouht Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pity
me. Yet I was once at home, stron, happy, and loved." He sihed and,
doin so, roaned involuntarily.

"Eh, is anythin hurtin you?" asked the soldier, shakin his shirt out
over the fire, and not waitin for an answer he ave a runt and added:
"What a lot of men have been crippled today--frihtful!"

Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes
flutterin above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,
briht home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly lidin sleih, his
healthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And why did
I come here?" he wondered.

Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant of
Baration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.

BOOK THREE: 1805




CHAPTER I

Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thouht out his plans.
Still less did he think of injurin anyone for his own advantae. He was
merely a man of the world who had ot on and to whom ettin on had
become a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rihtly accounted
to himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life, were
constantly shapin themselves in his mind, arisin from the
circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely one
or two in his head but dozens, some only beinnin to form themselves,
some approachin achievement, and some in course of disinteration. He
did not, for instance, say to himself: "This man now has influence, I
must ain his confidence and friendship and throuh him obtain a special
rant." Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must entice
him to marry my dauhter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need."
But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately told
him that this man could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince
Vasili took the first opportunity to ain his confidence, flatter him,
become intimate with him, and finally make his request.

He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as
entleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status of
Councilor of State, and insisted on the youn man accompanyin him to
Petersbur and stayin at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,
yet with unhesitatin assurance that he was doin the riht thin,
Prince Vasili did everythin to et Pierre to marry his dauhter. Had he
thouht out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and
shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both
above and below him in social standin. Somethin always drew him toward
those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in
seizin the most opportune moment for makin use of people.

Pierre, on unexpectedly becomin Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felt
himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and
preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to
sin papers, to present himself at overnment offices, the purpose of
which was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit his
estate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not even
wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended and
rieved had he chosen not to see them. These different people--
businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike--were all disposed to
treat the youn heir in the most friendly and flatterin manner: they
were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble qualities. He was
always hearin such words as: "With your remarkable kindness," or, "With
your excellent heart," "You are yourself so honorable Count," or, "Were
he as clever as you," and so on, till he bean sincerely to believe in
his own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intellience, the more so
as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he really
was very kind and intellient. Even people who had formerly been
spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became entle and
affectionate. The anry eldest princess, with the lon waist and hair
plastered down like a doll's, had come into Pierre's room after the
funeral. With droopin eyes and frequent blushes she told him she was
very sorry about their past misunderstandins and did not now feel she
had a riht to ask him for anythin, except only for permission, after
the blow she had received, to remain for a few weeks loner in the house
she so loved and where she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain
from weepin at these words. Touched that this statuesque princess could
so chane, Pierre took her hand and beed her foriveness, without
knowin what for. From that day the eldest princess quite chaned toward
Pierre and bean knittin a striped scarf for him.

"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with a
reat deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handin him a
deed to sin for the princess' benefit.

Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw
this bone--a bill for thirty thousand rubles--to the poor princess that
it miht not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the
inlaid portfolio. Pierre sined the deed and after that the princess
rew still kinder. The youner sisters also became affectionate to him,
especially the younest, the pretty one with the mole, who often made
him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meetin him.

It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and it
would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he could
not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had no
time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He was
always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful
intoxication. He felt as thouh he were the center of some important and
eneral movement; that somethin was constantly expected of him, that if
he did not do it he would rieve and disappoint many people, but if he
did this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded of
him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.

More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs
and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of Count
Bezukhov he did not let o his hold of the lad. He had the air of a man
oppressed by business, weary and sufferin, who yet would not, for
pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son of
his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the caprice
of fate and the desins of roues. Durin the few days he spent in
Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or o to
him himself, and tell him what ouht to be done in a tone of weariness
and assurance, as if he were addin every time: "You know I am
overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble
myself about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose is
the only thin possible."

"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince Vasili
one day, closin his eyes and finerin Pierre's elbow, speakin as if
he were sayin somethin which had lon since been areed upon and could
not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm ivin you a place in my
carriae. I am very lad. All our important business here is now
settled, and I ouht to have been off lon ao. Here is somethin I have
received from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and you have been
entered in the diplomatic corps and made a entleman of the Bedchamber.
The diplomatic career now lies open before you."

Notwithstandin the tone of wearied assurance with which these words
were pronounced, Pierre, who had so lon been considerin his career,
wished to make some suestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the
special deep cooin tone, precludin the possibility of interruptin his
speech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion was
needed.

"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,
and there is nothin to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
bein too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it up
tomorrow. But you will see everythin for yourself when you et to
Petersbur. It is hih time for you to et away from these terrible
recollections." Prince Vasili sihed. "Yes, yes, my boy. And my valet
can o in your carriae. Ah! I was nearly forettin," he added. "You
know, mon cher, your father and I had some accounts to settle, so I have
received what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it; you won't
require it. We'll o into the accounts later."

By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several
thousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the
prince had retained for himself.

In Petersbur, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of
entleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the
rank (for he did nothin), that Prince Vasili had procured for him, and
acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerous
that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,
and continual expectation of some ood, always in front of him but never
attained.

Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no loner in Petersbur.
The uards had one to the front; Dolokhov had been reduced to the
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nihts as he
used to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with a
friend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time was
taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's
house in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and his beautiful
dauhter Helene.

Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the chane of
attitude toward him that had taken place in society.

Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that what
he was sayin was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks
which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish
as soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest
remarks came out clever and apt. Now everythin Pierre said was
charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so, he could see that she
wished to and only refrained out of reard for his modesty.

In the beinnin of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna
Pavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added: "You
will find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delihtful to
see."

When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some
link which other people reconized had rown up between himself and
Helene, and that thouht both alarmed him, as if some obliation were
bein imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as an
entertainin supposition.

Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only the novelty she
offered her uests this time was not Mortemart, but a diplomatist fresh
from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander's
visit to Potsdam, and of how the two auust friends had pleded
themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice
aainst the enemy of the human race. Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with
a shade of melancholy, evidently relatin to the youn man's recent loss
by the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone constantly considered it a duty
to assure Pierre that he was reatly afflicted by the death of the
father he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like the auust
melancholy she showed at the mention of her most auust Majesty the
Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna
arraned the different roups in her drawin room with her habitual
skill. The lare roup, in which were Prince Vasili and the enerals,
had the benefit of the diplomat. Another roup was at the tea table.
Pierre wished to join the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in the
excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands of
new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in
action--seein Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finer, sayin:

"Wait a bit, I have somethin in view for you this evenin." (She
lanced at Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitable to
my poor aunt who adores you. o and keep her company for ten minutes.
And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count who will not
refuse to accompany you."

The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre, lookin
as if she had to ive some final necessary instructions.

"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointin to the stately
beauty as she lided away. "And how she carries herself! For so youn a
irl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her
heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of men
would occupy a most brilliant position in society. Don't you think so? I
only wanted to know your opinion," and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre o.

Pierre, in reply, sincerely areed with her as to Helene's perfection of
manner. If he ever thouht of Helene, it was just of her beauty and her
remarkable skill in appearin silently dinified in society.

The old aunt received the two youn people in her corner, but seemed
desirous of hidin her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show
her fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if inquirin what
she was to do with these people. On leavin them, Anna Pavlovna aain
touched Pierre's sleeve, sayin: "I hope you won't say that it is dull
in my house aain," and she lanced at Helene.

Helene smiled, with a look implyin that she did not admit the
possibility of anyone seein her without bein enchanted. The aunt
couhed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to see
Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and the
same look. In the middle of a dull and haltin conversation, Helene
turned to Pierre with the beautiful briht smile that she ave to
everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meanin
for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just speakin of
a collection of snuffboxes that had beloned to Pierre's father, Count
Bezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Helene asked to see the
portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.

"That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentionin a
celebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the
snuffbox while tryin to hear what was bein said at the other table.

He half rose, meanin to o round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,
passin it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward to make room,
and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evenin parties,
wearin a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front and
back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was so
close to him that his shortsihted eyes could not but perceive the
livin charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he need
only have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was conscious
of the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the creakin of her
corset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty formin a complete
whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body only covered by her
arments. And havin once seen this he could not help bein aware of it,
just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen throuh.

"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to
say. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who may
belon to anyone--to you too," said her lance. And at that moment
Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be his wife, and that
it could not be otherwise.

He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standin at the
altar with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did not
even know if it would be a ood thin (he even felt, he knew not why,
that it would be a bad thin), but he knew it would happen.

Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them aain, and wished once more to see
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every
day until then, but he could no loner do it. He could not, any more
than a man who has been lookin at a tuft of steppe rass throuh the
mist and takin it for a tree can aain take it for a tree after he has
once reconized it to be a tuft of rass. She was terribly close to him.
She already had power over him, and between them there was no loner any
barrier except the barrier of his own will.

"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's
voice, "I see you are all riht there."

And Pierre, anxiously tryin to remember whether he had done anythin
reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone
knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.

A little later when he went up to the lare circle, Anna Pavlovna said
to him: "I hear you are refittin your Petersbur house?"

This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, and
Pierre, without knowin why, was havin his enormous Petersbur house
done up.

"That's a ood thin, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is ood to
have a friend like the prince," she said, smilin at Prince Vasili. "I
know somethin about that. Don't I? And you are still so youn. You need
advice. Don't be anry with me for exercisin an old woman's privilee."

She paused, as women always do, expectin somethin after they have
mentioned their ae. "If you marry it will be a different thin," she
continued, unitin them both in one lance. Pierre did not look at
Helene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He
muttered somethin and colored.

When he ot home he could not sleep for a lon time for thinkin of what
had happened. What had happened? Nothin. He had merely understood that
the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was mentioned
he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's ood lookin," he had
understood that this woman miht belon to him.

"But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thouht. "There
is somethin nasty, somethin wron, in the feelin she excites in me. I
have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and she
with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was sent
away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It's
bad...." he reflected, but while he was thinkin this (the reflection
was still incomplete), he cauht himself smilin and was conscious that
another line of thouht had sprun up, and while thinkin of her
worthlessness he was also dreamin of how she would be his wife, how she
would love him become quite different, and how all he had thouht and
heard of her miht be false. And he aain saw her not as the dauhter of
Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its ray
dress. "But no! Why did this thouht never occur to me before?" and
aain he told himself that it was impossible, that there would be
somethin unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in this
marriae. He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looks
of those who had seen them toether. He recalled Anna Pavlovna's words
and looks when she spoke to him about his house, recalled thousands of
such hints from Prince Vasili and others, and was seized by terror lest
he had already, in some way, bound himself to do somethin that was
evidently wron and that he ouht not to do. But at the very time he was
expressin this conviction to himself, in another part of his mind her
imae rose in all its womanly beauty.




CHAPTER II

In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to o on a tour of inspection in
four different provinces. He had arraned this for himself so as to
visit his nelected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
where his reiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
Bolkonski in order to arrane a match for him with the dauhter of that
rich old man. But before leavin home and undertakin these new affairs,
Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
latterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasili's house
where he was stayin, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish in
Helene's presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed to
her.

"This is all very fine, but thins must be settled," said Prince Vasili
to himself, with a sorrowful sih, one mornin, feelin that Pierre who
was under such obliations to him ("But never mind that") was not
behavin very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity... well, od be
with him," thouht he, relishin his own oodness of heart, "but it must
be brouht to a head. The day after tomorrow will be Lelya's name day. I
will invite two or three people, and if he does not understand what he
ouht to do then it will be my affair--yes, my affair. I am her father."

Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless niht
when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he
ouht to avoid her and o away, Pierre, despite that decision, had not
left Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's eyes he was
every day more and more connected with her, that it was impossible for
him to return to his former conception of her, that he could not break
away from her, and that thouh it would be a terrible thin he would
have to unite his fate with hers. He miht perhaps have been able to
free himself but that Prince Vasili (who had rarely before iven
receptions) now hardly let a day o by without havin an evenin party
at which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the eneral
pleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation. Prince Vasili, in the
rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's hand in passin
and draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled, clean-
shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow," or, "Be
in to dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am stayin in for your
sake," and so on. And thouh Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as he
said) for Pierre's sake, hardly exchaned a couple of words with him,
Pierre felt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself one
and the same thin: "It is time I understood her and made up my mind
what she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken now? No, she
is not stupid, she is an excellent irl," he sometimes said to himself
"she never makes a mistake, never says anythin stupid. She says little,
but what she does say is always clear and simple, so she is not stupid.
She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad
woman!" He had often beun to make reflections or think aloud in her
company, and she had always answered him either by a brief but
appropriate remark--showin that it did not interest her--or by a silent
look and smile which more palpably than anythin else showed Pierre her
superiority. She was riht in reardin all aruments as nonsense in
comparison with that smile.

She always addressed him with a radiantly confidin smile meant for him
alone, in which there was somethin more sinificant than in the eneral
smile that usually brihtened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was
waitin for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that
sooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror
seized him at the thouht of that dreadful step. A thousand times durin
that month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to
that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What am I doin? I need
resolution. Can it be that I have none?"

He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
he lacked that strenth of will which he had known in himself and really
possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only stron when they feel
themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered by
a feelin of desire while stoopin over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's,
an unacknowleded sense of the uilt of that desire paralyzed his will.

On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as his
wife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and
relations had been iven to understand that the fate of the youn irl
would be decided that evenin. The visitors were seated at supper.
Princess Kuraina, a portly imposin woman who had once been handsome,
was sittin at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the more
important uests--an old eneral and his wife, and Anna Pavlovna
Scherer. At the other end sat the youner and less important uests, and
there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Helene, side by
side. Prince Vasili was not havin any supper: he went round the table
in a merry mood, sittin down now by one, now by another, of the uests.
To each of them he made some careless and areeable remark except to
Pierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened
the whole party. The wax candles burned brihtly, the silver and crystal
leamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the old and silver of the men's
epaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the
clatter of plates, knives, and lasses minled with the animated hum of
several conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was
heard assurin an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at which
she lauhed; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes of
some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of the table, Prince Vasili
attracted everybody's attention. With a facetious smile on his face, he
was tellin the ladies about last Wednesday's meetin of the Imperial
Council, at which Serey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military overnor
eneral of Petersbur, had received and read the then famous rescript of
the Emperor Alexander from the army to Serey Kuzmich, in which the
Emperor said that he was receivin from all sides declarations of the
people's loyalty, that the declaration from Petersbur ave him
particular pleasure, and that he was proud to be at the head of such a
nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it. This rescript bean with
the words: "Serey Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc.

"Well, and so he never ot farther than: 'Serey Kuzmich'?" asked one of
the ladies.

"Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili,
lauhin, "'Serey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... Serey
Kuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not et any farther! He bean the
rescript aain and aain, but as soon as he uttered 'Serey' he sobbed,
'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered in sobs and he
could et no farther. And aain his handkerchief, and aain: 'Serey
Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at last somebody else was
asked to read it."

"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeated
lauhin.

"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holdin
up a threatenin finer. "He is such a worthy and excellent man, our
dear Vyazmitinov...."

Everybody lauhed a reat deal. At the head of the table, where the
honored uests sat, everyone seemed to be in hih spirits and under the
influence of a variety of excitin sensations. Only Pierre and Helene
sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a
suppressed smile brihtenin both their faces, a smile that had nothin
to do with Serey Kuzmich--a smile of bashfulness at their own feelins.
But much as all the rest lauhed, talked, and joked, much as they
enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however they avoided
lookin at the youn couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seemed
of them, one could feel by the occasional lances they ave that the
story about Serey Kuzmich, the lauhter, and the food were all a
pretense, and that the whole attention of that company was directed to--
Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbin of Serey Kuzmich
and at the same time his eyes lanced toward his dauhter, and while he
lauhed the expression on his face clearly said: "Yes... it's ettin
on, it will all be settled today." Anna Pavlovna threatened him on
behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for an
instant, lanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a conratulation on his
future son-in-law and on his dauhter's happiness. The old princess
sihed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her and
lanced anrily at her dauhter, and her sih seemed to say: "Yes,
there's nothin left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear, now
that the time has come for these youn ones to be thus boldly,
provocatively happy." "And what nonsense all this is that I am sayin!"
thouht a diplomatist, lancin at the happy faces of the lovers.
"That's happiness!"

Into the insinificant, triflin, and artificial interests unitin that
society had entered the simple feelin of the attraction of a healthy
and handsome youn man and woman for one another. And this human feelin
dominated everythin else and soared above all their affected chatter.
Jests fell flat, news was not interestin, and the animation was
evidently forced. Not only the uests but even the footmen waitin at
table seemed to feel this, and they forot their duties as they looked
at the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red, broad, and
happy thouh uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very liht of
the candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.

Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased and
embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.
He did not see, hear, or understand anythin clearly. Only now and then
detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot
unexpectedly throuh his mind.

"So it is all finished!" he thouht. "And how has it all happened? How
quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,
but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all
expectin it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I
cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it will
certainly happen!" thouht Pierre, lancin at those dazzlin shoulders
close to his eyes.

Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it
awkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky man
and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessed
of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoled
himself. "And besides, what have I done to brin it about? How did it
bein? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there was
nothin. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards with
her and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it bein,
when did it all come about?" And here he was sittin by her side as her
betrothed, seein, hearin, feelin her nearness, her breathin, her
movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it was
not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why they
all looked so at him, and flattered by this eneral admiration he would
expand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his ood fortune.
Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeatin somethin to him a second
time. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what was
said.

"I am askin you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince
Vasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."

Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smilin at
him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thouht Pierre.
"What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his entle childlike
smile, and Helene smiled too.

"When did you et the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Prince
Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute.

"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thouht Pierre.

"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sih.

After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into the
drawin room. The uests bean to disperse, some without takin leave of
Helene. Some, as if unwillin to distract her from an important
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to o away,
refusin to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful
silence as he left the drawin room. He pictured the vanity of his
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The old eneral
rumbled at his wife when she asked how his le was. "Oh, the old fool,"
he thouht. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she's
fifty."

"I think I may conratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the old
princess, kissin her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have
stayed loner."

The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her
dauhter's happiness.

While the uests were takin their leave Pierre remained for a lon time
alone with Helene in the little drawin room where they were sittin. He
had often before, durin the last six weeks, remained alone with her,
but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,
but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He felt
ashamed; he felt that he was occupyin someone else's place here beside
Helene. "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered to
him. "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is in
you."

But, as he had to say somethin, he bean by askin her whether she was
satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner that
this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.

Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sittin in the
lare drawin room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with lanuid
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was ettin late. Prince Vasili ave
him a look of stern inquiry, as thouh what Pierre had just said was so
strane that one could not take it in. But then the expression of
severity chaned, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sit
down, and smiled affectionately.

"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turnin instantly to his dauhter and
addressin her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural to
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
Vasili had only acquired by imitatin other parents.

And he aain turned to Pierre.

"Serey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttonin the top button of
his waistcoat.

Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the story
about Serey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince
Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered somethin and
went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.
The siht of the discomposure of that old man of the world touched
Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and her
look seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault."

"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thouht Pierre, and he
aain bean speakin about indifferent matters, about Serey Kuzmich,
askin what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.
Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.

When Prince Vasili returned to the drawin room, the princess, his wife,
was talkin in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.

"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."

"Marriaes are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.

Prince Vasili passed by, seemin not to hear the ladies, and sat down on
a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to be
dozin. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.

"Aline," he said to his wife, "o and see what they are about."

The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dinified and
indifferent air, and lanced into the little drawin room. Pierre and
Helene still sat talkin just as before.

"Still the same," she said to her husband.

Prince Vasili frowned, twistin his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his
face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shakin
himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went past
the ladies into the little drawin room. With quick steps he went
joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierre
rose in alarm on seein it.

"Thank od!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everythin!" (He
put one arm around Pierre and the other around his dauhter.)--"My dear
boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved your
father... and she will make you a ood wife... od bless you!..."

He embraced his dauhter, and then aain Pierre, and kissed him with his
malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.

"Princess, come here!" he shouted.

The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was usin her
handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful
Helene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone aain.

"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thouht Pierre, "so it
is useless to ask whether it is ood or bad. It is ood because it's
definite and one is rid of the old tormentin doubt." Pierre held the
hand of his betrothed in silence, lookin at her beautiful bosom as it
rose and fell.

"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.

"Somethin special is always said in such cases," he thouht, but could
not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. She
drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.

"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointin to his spectacles.

Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strane look eyes have
from which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frihtened and
inquirin look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, but
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
unpleasantly excited expression.

"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thouht Pierre.

"Je vous aime!" * he said, rememberin what has to be said at such
moments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.


* "I love you."

Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's lare,
newly furnished Petersbur house, the happy possessor, as people said,
of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.




CHAPTER III

Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in
November, 1805, announcin that he and his son would be payin him a
visit. "I am startin on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall
think nothin of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the same
time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is
accompanyin me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow him
personally to express the deep respect that, emulatin his father, he
feels for you."

"It seems that there will be no need to brin Mary out, suitors are
comin to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the little
princess on hearin the news.

Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothin.

A fortniht after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evenin
in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.

Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili's
character, but more so recently, since in the new reins of Paul and
Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to hih position and honors. And now,
from the hints contained in his letter and iven by the little princess,
he saw which way the wind was blowin, and his low opinion chaned into
a feelin of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned
him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was
particularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a bad
temper because Prince Vasili was comin, or whether his bein in a bad
temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in a
bad temper, and in the mornin Tikhon had already advised the architect
not to o to the prince with his report.

"Do you hear how he's walkin?" said Tikhon, drawin the architect's
attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Steppin flat on his
heels--we know what that means...."

However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable
collar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the day
before and the path to the hothouse, alon which the prince was in the
habit of walkin, had been swept: the marks of the broom were still
visible in the snow and a shovel had been left stickin in one of the
soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went
throuh the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildins,
frownin and silent.

"Can a sleih pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resemblin
his master in manners and looks, who was accompanyin him back to the
house.

"The snow is deep. I am havin the avenue swept, your honor."

The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "od be thanked,"
thouht the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"

"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,
your honor, that a minister is comin to visit your honor."

The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,
frownin.

"What? A minister? What minister? Who ave orders?" he said in his
shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess my
dauhter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"

"Your honor, I thouht..."

"You thouht!" shouted the prince, his words comin more and more
rapidly and indistinctly. "You thouht!... Rascals! Blackuards!... I'll
teach you to think!" and liftin his stick he swun it and would have
hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the
blow. "Thouht... Blackuards..." shouted the prince rapidly.

But althouh Alpatych, frihtened at his own temerity in avoidin the
stroke, came up to the prince, bowin his bald head resinedly before
him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, thouh he continued to
shout: "Blackuards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lift
his stick aain but hurried into the house.

Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew that
the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaitin him; Mademoiselle
Bourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothin, I am the same
as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frihtened, and with downcast eyes.
What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she
ouht to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thouht:
"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with
him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he has
done before) that I'm in the dumps."

The prince looked at his dauhter's frihtened face and snorted.

"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.

"And the other one is not here. They've been tellin tales," he thouht-
-referrin to the little princess who was not in the dinin room.

"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hidin?"

"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a briht
smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."

"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sittin down.

His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointin to a spot he flun
it away. Tikhon cauht it and handed it to a footman. The little
princess was not unwell, but had such an overpowerin fear of the prince
that, hearin he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.

"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heaven
knows what a friht miht do."

In eneral at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, and
with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realize
because the fear was so much the stroner feelin. The prince
reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt for
her. When the little princess had rown accustomed to life at Bald
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
days with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with her
about the old prince and criticized him.

"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle
Bourienne, unfoldin her white napkin with her rosy finers. "His
Excellency Prince Vasili Kurain and his son, I understand?" she said
inquirinly.

"Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I ot him his appointment in the
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is comin I don't
understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don't
want him." (He looked at his blushin dauhter.) "Are you unwell today?
Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this
mornin?"

"No, mon pere."

Thouh Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice of
a subject, she did not stop talkin, but chattered about the
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
after the soup the prince became more enial.

After dinner, he went to see his dauhter-in-law. The little princess
was sittin at a small table, chatterin with Masha, her maid. She rew
pale on seein her father-in-law.

She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheeks
had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.

"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's
question as to how she felt.

"Do you want anythin?"

"No, merci, mon pere."

"Well, all riht, all riht."

He left the room and went to the waitin room where Alpatych stood with
bowed head.

"Has the snow been shoveled back?"

"Yes, your excellency. Forive me for heaven's sake... It was only my
stupidity."

"All riht, all riht," interrupted the prince, and lauhin his
unnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then
proceeded to his study.

Prince Vasili arrived that evenin. He was met in the avenue by coachmen
and footmen, who, with loud shouts, draed his sleihs up to one of the
lodes over the road purposely laden with snow.

Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assined to them.

Anatole, havin taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a
table on a corner of which he smilinly and absent-mindedly fixed his
lare and handsome eyes. He rearded his whole life as a continual round
of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him. And
he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and uly
heiress in the same way. All this miht, he thouht, turn out very well
and amusinly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?
That never does any harm," thouht Anatole.

He shaved and scented himself with the care and eleance which had
become habitual to him and, his handsome head held hih, entered his
father's room with the ood-humored and victorious air natural to him.
Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressin him, and he looked round
with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
entered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."

"I say, Father, jokin apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if
continuin a conversation the subject of which had often been mentioned
durin the journey.

"Enouh! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautious
with the old prince."

"If he starts a row I'll o away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear
those old men! Eh?"

"Remember, for you everythin depends on this."

In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms that
the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both had
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sittin alone in her room,
vainly tryin to master her aitation.

"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
happen!" she said, lookin at herself in the lass. "How shall I enter
the drawin room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."
The mere thouht of her father's look filled her with terror. The little
princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, the
lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son
was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty
the father had draed his les upstairs while the son had followed him
like an eale, three steps at a time. Havin received this information,
the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chatterin voices
had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room.

"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddlin in,
and sinkin heavily into an armchair.

She was no loner in the loose own she enerally wore in the mornin,
but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and her
face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and faded
outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersbur society, it was still
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her
fresh and pretty face yet more attractive.

"What! Are you oin to remain as you are, dear princess?" she bean.
"They'll be announcin that the entlemen are in the drawin room and we
shall have to o down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"

The little princess ot up, ran for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily
bean to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that the
arrival of a suitor aitated her, and still more so by both her
companions' not havin the least conception that it could be otherwise.
To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be to
betray her aitation, while to decline their offers to dress her would
prolon their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes
rew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive
martyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself to
Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely tried
to make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them could
think of her as a rival, so they bean dressin her with perfect
sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dress
can make a face pretty.

"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, lookin
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroon
dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may
be at stake. But this one is too liht, it's not becomin!"

It was not the dress, but the face and whole fiure of Princess Mary
that was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the little
princess felt this; they still thouht that if a blue ribbon were placed
in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arraned lower on
the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forot that
the frihtened face and the fiure could not be altered, and that
however they miht chane the settin and adornment of that face, it
would still remain piteous and plain. After two or three chanes to
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arraned
on the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled her
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
little princess walked twice round her, now adjustin a fold of the
dress with her little hand, now arranin the scarf and lookin at her
with her head bent first on one side and then on the other.

"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, claspin her hands. "No, Mary,
really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little ray
everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to the
maid, "brin the princess her ray dress, and you'll see, Mademoiselle
Bourienne, how I shall arrane it," she added, smilin with a foretaste
of artistic pleasure.

But when Katie brouht the required dress, Princess Mary remained
sittin motionless before the lass, lookin at her face, and saw in the
mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quiverin, ready to burst
into sobs.

"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more
little effort."

The little princess, takin the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
Mary.

"Well, now we'll arrane somethin quite simple and becomin," she said.

The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was
lauhin at somethin, minled in a merry sound, like the chirpin of
birds.

"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.

Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirpin of the birds
was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, lare, thouhtful
eyes full of tears and of thouhts, azin shininly and implorinly at
them, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.

"At least, chane your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I
tell you," she went on, turnin reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,
"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Not
in the least! Please chane it."

"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"
answered a voice strulin with tears.

Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselves
that Princess Mary in this uise looked very plain, worse than usual,
but it was too late. She was lookin at them with an expression they
both knew, an expression thouhtful and sad. This expression in Princess
Mary did not frihten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but they
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
be shaken in her determination.

"You will chane it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary ave no
answer, she left the room.

Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,
she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her
lass. Lettin her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and
pondered. A husband, a man, a stron dominant and stranely attractive
bein rose in her imaination, and carried her into a totally different
happy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she had
seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's dauhter--at her own
breast, the husband standin by and azin tenderly at her and the
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too uly," she thouht.

"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the
maid's voice at the door.

She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinkin, and
before oin down she went into the room where the icons hun and, her
eyes fixed on the dark face of a lare icon of the Saviour lit by a
lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painful
doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a man,
be for her? In her thouhts of marriae Princess Mary dreamed of
happiness and of children, but her stronest, most deeply hidden lonin
was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feelin from
others and even from herself, the stroner it rew. "O od," she said,
"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I
to renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy
will?" And scarcely had she put that question than od ave her the
answer in her own heart. "Desire nothin for thyself, seek nothin, be
not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden
from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anythin. If it be
od's will to prove thee in the duties of marriae, be ready to fulfill
His will." With this consolin thouht (but yet with a hope for the
fulfillment of her forbidden earthly lonin) Princess Mary sihed, and
havin crossed herself went down, thinkin neither of her own and
coiffure nor of how she would o in nor of what she would say. What
could all that matter in comparison with the will of od, without Whose
care not a hair of man's head can fall?




CHAPTER IV

When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in
the drawin room, talkin to the little princess and Mademoiselle
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treadin on her heels,
the entlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,
indicatin her to the entlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary saw
them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, serious
for an instant at the siht of her, but immediately smilin aain, and
the little princess curiously notin the impression "Marie" produced on
the visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and
pretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, but
him she could not see, she only saw somethin lare, brilliant, and
handsome movin toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili
approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her
hand and answered his question by sayin that, on the contrary, she
remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could
not see him. She only felt a soft hand takin hers firmly, and she
touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful liht-
brown hair smellin of pomade. When she looked up at him she was struck
by his beauty. Anatole stood with his riht thumb under a button of his
uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slihtly swinin one
foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beamin face at the
princess without speakin and evidently not thinkin about her at all.
Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but
he had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and
imperturbable self-possession. If a man lackin in self-confidence
remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the
impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find somethin to say, the
effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swun his foot, and smilinly
examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent in
this way for a very lon time. "If anyone finds this silence
inconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say.
Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which
particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--a
supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he said
to them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?
You'd be only too lad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this
when he met women--even probably he did not, for in eneral he thouht
very little--but his looks and manner ave that impression. The princess
felt this, and as if wishin to show him that she did not even dare
expect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was
eneral and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy
lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consistin in
the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves
there are some semi-private, lon-established jokes and amusin
reminiscences, thouh no such reminiscences really exist--just as none
existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the
little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into these
amusin recollections of thins that had never occurred. Mademoiselle
Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself
pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.

"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to
ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)
to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you
always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"


* Anna Pavlovna.

"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"

"And our little tea table?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked
Anatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly lance, "your brother
Hippolyte told me about your oins on. Oh!" and she shook her finer at
him, "I have even heard of your doins in Paris!"

"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turnin to his son
and seizin the little princess' arm as if she would have run away and
he had just manaed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was
pinin for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she
is a pearl amon women, Princess," he added, turnin to Princess Mary.

When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the
opportunity of joinin in the eneral current of recollections.

She took the liberty of inquirin whether it was lon since Anatole had
left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
Frenchwoman very readily and, lookin at her with a smile, talked to her
about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole
came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either.
"Not at all bad!" he thouht, examinin her, "not at all bad, that
little companion! I hope she will brin her alon with her when we're
married, la petite est entille." *


* The little one is charmin.

The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frownin and considerin
what he was to do. The comin of these visitors annoyed him. "What are
Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow
braart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he rumbled to
himself. What anered him was that the comin of these visitors revived
in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one about
which he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could ever
brin himself to part from his dauhter and ive her to a husband. The
prince never directly asked himself that question, knowin beforehand
that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not only
with his feelins but with the very possibility of life. Life without
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him.
"And why should she marry?" he thouht. "To be unhappy for certain.
There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think could
hardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And who
would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for her
connections and wealth. Are there no women livin unmarried, and even
the happier for it?" So thouht Prince Bolkonski while dressin, and yet
the question he was always puttin off demanded an immediate answer.
Prince Vasili had brouht his son with the evident intention of
proposin, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.
His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothin
aainst it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.
And that is what we shall see."

"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.

He entered the drawin room with his usual alert step, lancin rapidly
round the company. He noticed the chane in the little princess' dress,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecomin coiffure,
Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of his
dauhter amid the eneral conversation. "ot herself up like a fool!" he
thouht, lookin irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he inores
her!"

He went straiht up to Prince Vasili.

"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? lad to see you!"

"Friendship lauhs at distance," bean Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,
self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love and
befriend him."

Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.

"Fine youn fellow! Fine youn fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kiss
me," and he offered his cheek.

Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect
composure, waitin for a display of the eccentricities his father had
told him to expect.

Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa
and, drawin up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and bean
questionin him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listen
attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept lancin at Princess
Mary.

"And so they are writin from Potsdam already?" he said, repeatin
Prince Vasili's last words. Then risin, he suddenly went up to his
dauhter.

"Is it for visitors you've ot yourself up like that, eh?" said he.
"Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the
visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are
never to dare to chane your way of dress without my consent."

"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with a
blush.

"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowin to his
dauhter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plain
enouh as it is."

And he sat down aain, payin no more attention to his dauhter, who was
reduced to tears.

"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," said
Prince Vasili.

"Now you, youn prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,
turnin to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and et acquainted."

"Now the fun beins," thouht Anatole, sittin down with a smile beside
the old prince.

"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not tauht to
read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my
dear boy, are you servin in the Horse uards?" asked the old man,
scrutinizin Anatole closely and intently.

"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able to
restrain his lauhter.

"Ah! That's a ood thin. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsar
and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, are
you off to the front?"

"No, Prince, our reiment has one to the front, but I am attached...
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turnin to his father
with a lauh.

"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"
lauhed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole lauhed still louder. Suddenly
Prince Bolkonski frowned.

"You may o," he said to Anatole.

Anatole returned smilin to the ladies.

"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"
said the old prince to Prince Vasili.

"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education there
is much better than ours."

"Yes, everythin is different nowadays, everythin is chaned. The lad's
a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince
Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alone
toether, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
prince.

"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"
said the old prince anrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!
Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know my
principles--everythin aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your
presence; if she is willin, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll
see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"
he screamed in the same piercin tone as when partin from his son.

"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a crafty
man convinced of the futility of bein cunnin with so keen-sihted a
companion. "You know, you see riht throuh people. Anatole is no
enius, but he is an honest, oodhearted lad; an excellent son or
kinsman."

"All riht, all riht, we'll see!"

As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any lenth of time
without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women of
Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real till
then. Their powers of reasonin, feelin, and observin immediately
increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in
darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brihtness, full of sinificance.

Princess Mary rew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
handsome open face of the man who miht perhaps be her husband absorbed
all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, and
mananimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
family life continually rose in her imaination. She drove them away and
tried to conceal them.

"But am I not too cold with him?" thouht the princess. "I try to be
reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,
but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imaine that I do
not like him."

And Princess Mary tried, but could not manae, to be cordial to her new
uest. "Poor irl, she's devilish uly!" thouht Anatole.

Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to reat excitement by Anatole's
arrival, thouht in another way. Of course, she, a handsome youn woman
without any definite position, without relations or even a country, did
not intend to devote her life to servin Prince Bolkonski, to readin
aloud to him and bein friends with Princess Mary. Mademoiselle
Bourienne had lon been waitin for a Russian prince who, able to
appreciate at a lance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,
unainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry her
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
a story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which she
liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a irl who had been
seduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and
reproached her for yieldin to a man without bein married. Mademoiselle
Bourienne was often touched to tears as in imaination she told this
story to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had
appeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appear
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
Bourienne's head at the very time she was talkin to Anatole about
Paris. It was not calculation that uided her (she did not even for a
moment consider what she should do), but all this had lon been familiar
to her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just rouped itself around
him and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.

The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,
unconsciously and quite forettin her condition, prepared for the
familiar allop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any
strule, but with naive and lihthearted aiety.

Althouh in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
tired of bein run after by women, his vanity was flattered by the
spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he was
beinnin to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
that passionate animal feelin which was apt to master him with reat
suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.

After tea, the company went into the sittin room and Princess Mary was
asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, lauhin and in hih spirits,
came and leaned on his elbows, facin her and beside Mademoiselle
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and the
look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
expression, thouh his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but
to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was
then touchin with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne
was also lookin at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a
look of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess.

"How she loves me!" thouht Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and how
happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it be
possible?" she thouht, not darin to look at his face, but still
feelin his eyes azin at her.

In the evenin, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatole
kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courae,
but she looked straiht into his handsome face as it came near to her
shortsihted eyes. Turnin from Princess Mary he went up and kissed
Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he did
everythin so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienne
flushed, and ave the princess a frihtened look.

"What delicacy!" thouht the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"
(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not
value her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and
kissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.

"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behavin
well I will ive you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
smilinly raisin a finer at him, she left the room.




CHAPTER V

They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he
ot into bed, all kept awake a lon time that niht.

"Is he really to be my husband, this straner who is so kind--yes, kind,
that is the chief thin," thouht Princess Mary; and fear, which she had
seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemed
to her that someone was there standin behind the screen in the dark
corner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this man
with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.

She ran for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.

Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a lon
time that evenin, vainly expectin someone, now smilin at someone, now
workin herself up to tears with the imainary words of her pauvre mere
rebukin her for her fall.

The little princess rumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.
She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position was
awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than
ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time
when she was not like that and when everythin was liht and ay. She
sat in an armchair in her dressin jacket and nihtcap and Katie, sleepy
and disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the third
time, mutterin to herself.

"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated.
"I should be lad enouh to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her
voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.

The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard him
pacin anrily about and snortin. The old prince felt as thouh he had
been insulted throuh his dauhter. The insult was the more pointed
because it concerned not himself but another, his dauhter, whom he
loved more than himself. He kept tellin himself that he would consider
the whole matter and decide what was riht and how he should act, but
instead of that he only excited himself more and more.

"The first man that turns up--she forets her father and everythin
else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and was her tail and is unlike
herself! lad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it.
Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
Bourienne--I shall have to et rid of her. And how is it she has not
pride enouh to see it? If she has no pride for herself she miht at
least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinks
nothin of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but
I'll let her see...."

The old prince knew that if he told his dauhter she was makin a
mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to be
parted from her) would be ained, so pacifyin himself with this
thouht, he called Tikhon and bean to undress.

"What devil brouht them here?" thouht he, while Tikhon was puttin the
nihtshirt over his dried-up old body and ray-haired chest. "I never
invited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of it
left."

"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the
shirt.

Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinkin aloud, and
therefore met with unaltered looks the anrily inquisitive expression of
the face that emered from the shirt.

"one to bed?" asked the prince.

Tikhon, like all ood valets, instinctively knew the direction of his
master's thouhts. He uessed that the question referred to Prince
Vasili and his son.

"They have one to bed and put out their lihts, your excellency."

"No ood... no ood..." said the prince rapidly, and thrustin his feet
into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressin own, he
went to the couch on which he slept.

Thouh no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,
they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,
up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they had
much to say to one another in private and so they had been seekin an
opportunity since mornin to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary
went to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Anatole met in the conservatory.

Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. It
seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be
decided that day, but that they also knew what she thouht about it. She
read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who
made her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carryin hot water.

The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of his
dauhter that mornin. Princess Mary well knew this painstakin
expression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dry
hands clenched with vexation at her not understandin a sum in
arithmetic, when risin from his chair he would walk away from her,
repeatin in a low voice the same words several times over.

He came to the point at once, treatin her ceremoniously.

"I have had a proposition made me concernin you," he said with an
unnatural smile. "I expect you have uessed that Prince Vasili has not
come and brouht his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonski
referred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.
Last niht a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know my
principles, I refer it to you."

"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, rowin pale
and then blushin.

"How understand me!" cried her father anrily. "Prince Vasili finds you
to his taste as a dauhter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on his
pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand
it'!... And I ask you!"

"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.

"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not oin to et
married. What about you? That's what I want to know."

The princess saw that her father rearded the matter with disapproval,
but at that moment the thouht occurred to her that her fate would be
decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the aze
under which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to
submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if I
had to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The old
prince interrupted her.

"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and
take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the barain. She'll be the wife, while
you..."

The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on his
dauhter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.

"Now then, now then, I'm only jokin!" he said. "Remember this,
Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full riht to
choose. I ive you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness
depends on your decision. Never mind me!"

"But I do not know, Father!"

"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you or
anybody; but you are free to choose.... o to your room, think it over,
and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I know
you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better think
it over. o! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when the
princess, as if lost in a fo, had already staered out of the study.

Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said
about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but
still it was terrible, and she could not help thinkin of it. She was
oin straiht on throuh the conservatory, neither seein nor hearin
anythin, when suddenly the well-known whisperin of Mademoiselle
Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away saw
Anatole embracin the Frenchwoman and whisperin somethin to her. With
a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess
Mary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle
Bourienne who had not yet seen her.

"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. Princess
Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At last
Mademoiselle Bourienne ave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to
Princess Mary with a ay smile, as if invitin her to join in a lauh at
this strane incident, and then shruin his shoulders went to the door
that led to his own apartments.

An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; he
added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her
Princess Mary was sittin on the sofa in her room, holdin the weepin
Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and ently strokin her hair. The
princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were
lookin with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne's
pretty face.

"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said Mademoiselle
Bourienne.

"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try to
do all I can for your happiness."

"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand bein so
carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."

"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calm
yourself, my dear. I will o to my father," she said, and went out.

Prince Vasili, with one le thrown hih over the other and a snuffbox in
his hand, was sittin there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as
if stirred to his heart's core and himself rerettin and lauhin at
his own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took a
pinch of snuff.

"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he bean, risin and takin her by both hands.
Then, sihin, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, my
dear, ood, entle Marie, whom I have always loved as a dauhter!"

He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.

"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is makin a
proposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you wish
or not to be Prince Anatole Kurain's wife? Reply: yes or no," he
shouted, "and then I shall reserve the riht to state my opinion also.
Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turnin
to Prince Vasili and answerin his implorin look. "Yes, or no?"

"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from
yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, lancin at
Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.

"Humbu! Nonsense! Humbu, humbu, humbu!" cried Prince Bolkonski,
frownin and takin his dauhter's hand; he did not kiss her, but only
bendin his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so
that she winced and uttered a cry.

Prince Vasili rose.

"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, never
foret. But, my dear, will you not ive us a little hope of touchin
this heart, so kind and enerous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is so
lon. Say 'perhaps.'"

"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you for
the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."

"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very lad to have seen
you. Very lad! o back to your rooms, Princess. o!" said the old
prince. "Very, very lad to have seen you," repeated he, embracin
Prince Vasili.

"My vocation is a different one," thouht Princess Mary. "My vocation is
to be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love and
self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrane poor Amelie's
happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. I
will do all I can to arrane the match between them. If he is not rich I
will ive her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so
happy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a straner, alone,
helpless! And, oh od, how passionately she must love him if she could
so far foret herself! Perhaps I miht have done the same!..." thouht
Princess Mary.




CHAPTER VI

It was lon since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter
was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son's
handwritin. On receivin it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and
haste, tryin to escape notice, closed the door, and bean to read the
letter.

Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everythin that passed in the house,
on hearin of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and
found the count with it in his hand, sobbin and lauhin at the same
time.

Anna Mikhaylovna, thouh her circumstances had improved, was still
livin with the Rostovs.

"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared to
sympathize in any way.

The count sobbed yet more.

"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darlin boy...
the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank od... How tell the
little countess!"

Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped
the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then havin dried her own
eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and till
teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with od's help,
would inform her.

At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and
about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received from
him, thouh she knew that already, and remarked that they miht very
likely be ettin a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints
bean to make the countess anxious and she lanced uneasily at the count
and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the
conversation to insinificant matters. Natasha, who, of the whole
family, was the most ifted with a capacity to feel any shades of
intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beinnin
of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had somethin to do with her
brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparin them for it. Bold as
she was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anythin
relatin to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,
but she was too excited to eat anythin and kept wrilin about on her
chair reardless of her overness' remarks. After dinner, she rushed
head lon after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashin at her, flun herself on
her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sittin room.

"Auntie, darlin, do tell me what it is!"

"Nothin, my dear."

"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't ive up--I know you know
somethin."

Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.

"You are a little slyboots," she said.

"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, readin
confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.

"But for od's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."

"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will o and tell at
once."

Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,
on condition that she should tell no one.

"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossin herself, "I won't
tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.

"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in leeful triumph.

"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turnin white.

Natasha, seein the impression the news of her brother's wound produced
on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.

She rushed to Sonya, hued her, and bean to cry.

"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, he
wrote himself," said she throuh her tears.

"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,
pacin the room with lare, resolute strides. "Now I'm very lad, very
lad indeed, that my brother has distinuished himself so. You are all
blubberers and understand nothin."

Natasha smiled throuh her tears.

"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.

"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."

"Thank od!" said Sonya, crossin herself. "But perhaps she deceived
you. Let us o to Mamma."

Petya paced the room in silence for a time.

"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of those
Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed so
many that there'd have been a heap of them."

"Hold your tonue, Petya, what a oose you are!"

"I'm not a oose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.

"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.

Sonya smiled.

"Do I remember Nicholas?"

"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,
remember everythin?" said Natasha, with an expressive esture,
evidently wishin to ive her words a very definite meanin. "I remember
Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't remember
Boris. I don't remember him a bit."

"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.

"It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as I
remember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...
No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothin at all."

"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, lookin ecstatically and earnestly at her
friend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant to
say and as if she were sayin it to someone else, with whom jokin was
out of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,
whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him as
lon as I live."

Natasha looked at Sonya with wonderin and inquisitive eyes, and said
nothin. She felt that Sonya was speakin the truth, that there was such
love as Sonya was speakin of. But Natasha had not yet felt anythin
like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.

"Shall you write to him?" she asked.

Sonya became thouhtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and
whether she ouht to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an
officer and a wounded hero, would it be riht to remind him of herself
and, as it miht seem, of the obliations to her he had taken on
himself?

"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,
blushin.

"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"

Sonya smiled.

"No."

"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not oin to."

"Why should you be ashamed?"

"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."

"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha's
previous remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one in
spectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Count
Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that siner" (he meant Natasha's
Italian sinin master), "that's why she's ashamed!"

"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.

"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, with
the air of an old briadier.

The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. On
retirin to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on a
miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears
kept comin into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on
tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.

"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was followin her. "Come
later." And she went in, closin the door behind her.

The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.

At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Anna
Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a lon speech, then a cry, then silence,
then both voices toether with lad intonations, and then footsteps.
Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of
a sureon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits the
public to appreciate his skill.

"It is done!" she said to the count, pointin triumphantly to the
countess, who sat holdin in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and
in the other the letter, and pressin them alternately to her lips.

When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his
bald head, over which she aain looked at the letter and the portrait,
and in order to press them aain to her lips, she slihtly pushed away
the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, and
the readin of the letter bean. After a brief description of the
campain and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands
askin for their blessin, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.
Besides that, he sent reetins to Monsieur Schellin, Madame Schoss,
and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he
loved and thouht of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonya
blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looks
turned upon her, ran away into the dancin hall, whirled round it at
full speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and
smilin, plumped down on the floor. The countess was cryin.

"Why are you cryin, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should be
lad and not cry."

This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at
her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thouht the
countess.

Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who were
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she did
not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, and
Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter
each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh
proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strane, how extraordinary, how
joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose
tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ao within her, that son about whom
she used to have quarrels with the too indulent count, that son who had
first learned to say "pear" and then "ranny," that this son should now
be away in a forein land amid strane surroundins, a manly warrior
doin some kind of man's work of his own, without help or uidance. The
universal experience of aes, showin that children do row
imperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for the
countess. Her son's rowth toward manhood, at each of its staes, had
seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed the
millions of human beins who rew up in the same way. As twenty years
before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived
somewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and bein to
speak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could be
this stron, brave man, this model son and officer that, judin by this
letter, he now was.

"What a style! How charminly he describes!" said she, readin the
descriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word about
himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, thouh he himself,
I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothin about his
sufferins. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered
everybody! Not forettin anyone. I always said when he was only so
hih--I always said...."

For more than a week preparations were bein made, rouh drafts of
letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,
while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the
count, money and all thins necessary for the uniform and equipment of
the newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,
practical woman that she was, had even manaed by favor with army
authorities to secure advantaeous means of communication for herself
and her son. She had opportunities of sendin her letters to the rand
Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the uards. The Rostovs
supposed that The Russian uards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,
and that if a letter reached the rand Duke in command of the uards
there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlorad reiment,
which was presumably somewhere in the same neihborhood. And so it was
decided to send the letters and money by the rand Duke's courier to
Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from
the old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and
finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other
thins the old count sent to his son.




CHAPTER VII

On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp before
Olmutz, was preparin to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--the
Russian and the Austrian. The uards, just arrived from Russia, spent
the niht ten miles from Olmutz and next mornin were to come straiht
to the review, reachin the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.

That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, tellin him that
the Ismaylov reiment was quartered for the niht ten miles from Olmutz
and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after
their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed
with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offerin all sorts of
temptin wares. The Pavlorads held feast after feast, celebratin
awards they had received for the campain, and made expeditions to
Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hunarian, who had recently
opened a restaurant there with irls as waitresses. Rostov, who had just
celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bouht Denisov's horse,
Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On
receivin Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined
there, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the uards'
camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to et his
uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier's
cross, equally shabby cadet's ridin breeches lined with worn leather,
and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was ridin
was one he had bouht from a Cossack durin the campain, and he wore a
crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he
rode up to the camp he thouht how he would impress Boris and all his
comrades of the uards by his appearance--that of a fihtin hussar who
had been under fire.

The uards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, paradin
their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy staes, their
knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had provided
excellent dinners for the officers at every haltin place. The reiments
had entered and left the town with their bands playin, and by the rand
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
which the uards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at their
proper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,
with Ber who was already in command of a company. Ber, who had
obtained his captaincy durin the campain, had ained the confidence of
his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arraned his money
matters very satisfactorily. Boris, durin the campain, had made the
acquaintance of many persons who miht prove useful to him, and by a
letter of recommendation he had brouht from Pierre had become
acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, throuh whom he hoped to obtain
a post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Ber and Boris, havin rested
after yesterday's march, were sittin, clean and neatly dressed, at a
round table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playin chess. Ber
held a smokin pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate way
characteristic of him, was buildin a little pyramid of chessmen with
his delicate white finers while awaitin Ber's move, and watched his
opponent's face, evidently thinkin about the ame as he always thouht
only of whatever he was enaed on.

"Well, how are you oin to et out of that?" he remarked.

"We'll try to," replied Ber, touchin a pawn and then removin his
hand.

At that moment the door opened.

"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Ber too! Oh, you
petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitatin his Russian
nurse's French, at which he and Boris used to lauh lon ao.

"Dear me, how you have chaned!"

Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doin so did not omit to steady and
replace some chessmen that were fallin. He was about to embrace his
friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feelin of youth,
that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a manner
different from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholas
wished to do somethin special on meetin his friend. He wanted to pinch
him, push him, do anythin but kiss him--a thin everybody did. But
notwithstandin this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and
kissed him three times.

They had not met for nearly half a year and, bein at the ae when youn
men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense chanes in
the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken
those first steps. Both had chaned reatly since they last met and both
were in a hurry to show the chanes that had taken place in them.

"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not
like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swaer and
with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointin to his own mud-
bespattered breeches. The erman landlady, hearin Rostov's loud voice,
popped her head in at the door.

"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.

"Why do you shout so? You'll frihten them!" said Boris. "I did not
expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by
Bolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not
think he would et it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been
under fire already?" asked Boris.

Without answerin, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. eore
fastened to the cordin of his uniform and, indicatin a bandaed arm,
lanced at Ber with a smile.

"As you see," he said.

"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had a
splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Hihness rode
with our reiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every
advantae. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I
can't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very racious to all our
officers."

And the two friends told each other of their doins, the one of his
hussar revels and life in the fihtin line, the other of the pleasures
and advantaes of service under members of the Imperial family.

"Oh, you uards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."

Boris made a rimace.

"If you really want it," said he.

He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent
for wine.

"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to ive you," he added.

Rostov took the letter and, throwin the money on the sofa, put both
arms on the table and bean to read. After readin a few lines, he
lanced anrily at Ber, then, meetin his eyes, hid his face behind the
letter.

"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Ber, eyin the heavy purse
that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we et alon on our pay. I
can tell you for myself..."

"I say, Ber, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you et a letter from
home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everythin
over with, and I happen to be there, I'll o at once, to be out of your
way! Do o somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and
immediately seizin him by the shoulder and lookin amiably into his
face, evidently wishin to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,
"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to an
old acquaintance."

"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Ber, ettin up
and speakin in a muffled and uttural voice.

"o across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.

Ber put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,
stood before a lookin lass and brushed the hair on his temples
upwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, havin
assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been
noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.

"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.

"Why?"

"Oh, what a pi I am, not to have written and to have iven them such a
friht! Oh, what a pi I am!" he repeated, flushin suddenly. "Well,
have you sent abriel for some wine? All riht let's have some!"

In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation
to Baration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice had
obtained throuh an acquaintance and sent to her son, askin him to take
it to its destination and make use of it.

"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwin the letter under
the table.

"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.

"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it
for!"

"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, pickin it up and readin the
address. "This letter would be of reat use to you."

"I want nothin, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."

"Why not?" inquired Boris.

"It's a lackey's job!"

"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shakin his
head.

"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...
Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.

"Well, as you see. So far everythin's all riht, but I confess I should
much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."

"Why?"

"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try to
make as successful a career of it as possible."

"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinkin of somethin else.

He looked intently and inquirinly into his friend's eyes, evidently
tryin in vain to find the answer to some question.

Old abriel brouht in the wine.

"Shouldn't we now send for Ber?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.
I can't."

"Well, send for him... and how do you et on with that erman?" asked
Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.

"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.

Aain Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sihed. Ber returned,
and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers
became animated. The uardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they
had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the
sayins and doins of their commander, the rand Duke, and told stories
of his kindness and irascibility. Ber, as usual, kept silent when the
subject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories of
the rand Duke's quick temper he related with usto how in alicia he
had manaed to deal with the rand Duke when the latter made a tour of
the reiments and was annoyed at the irreularity of a movement. With a
pleasant smile Ber related how the rand Duke had ridden up to him in a
violent passion, shoutin: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's
favorite expression when he was in a rae) and called for the company
commander.

"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I
was riht. Without boastin, you know, I may say that I know the Army
Orders by heart and know the Reulations as well as I do the Lord's
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any nelience in my company, and so
my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Ber stood up and showed
how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would
have been difficult for a face to express reater respect and self-
complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the sayin is,
stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but rather
of death, as the sayin is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To
Siberia!'" said Ber with a saacious smile. "I knew I was in the riht
so I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he
shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next
day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what
keepin one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Ber, lihtin
his pipe and emittin rins of smoke.

"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smilin.

But Boris noticed that he was preparin to make fun of Ber, and
skillfully chaned the subject. He asked him to tell them how and where
he ot his wound. This pleased Rostov and he bean talkin about it, and
as he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his Schon
rabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle enerally
do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they
have heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as
it really was. Rostov was a truthful youn man and would on no account
have told a deliberate lie. He bean his story meanin to tell
everythin just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, and
inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to his
hearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and had
formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expectin to hear
just such a story--they would either not have believed him or, still
worse, would have thouht that Rostov was himself to blame since what
enerally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happened
to him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot and
that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everythin as
it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort of
will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,
and youn people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story
of how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like
a storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed riht and left, how his
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
told them all that.

In the middle of his story, just as he was sayin: "You cannot imaine
what a strane frenzy one experiences durin an attack," Prince Andrew,
whom Boris was expectin, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked to
help youn men, was flattered by bein asked for his assistance and
bein well disposed toward Boris, who had manaed to please him the day
before, he wished to do what the youn man wanted. Havin been sent with
papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hopin to
find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recountin
his military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),
he ave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he
looked at Rostov, bowed slihtly and wearily, and sat down lanuidly on
the sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.
Rostov flushed up on noticin this, but he did not care, this was a mere
straner. lancin, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed
of the hussar of the line.

In spite of Prince Andrew's disareeable, ironical tone, in spite of the
contempt with which Rostov, from his fihtin army point of view,
rearded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer
was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.
Boris inquired what news there miht be on the staff, and what, without
indiscretion, one miht ask about our plans.

"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant to
say more in the presence of a straner.

Ber took the opportunity to ask, with reat politeness, whether, as was
rumored, the allowance of forae money to captains of companies would be
doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could ive
no opinion on such an important overnment order, and Ber lauhed
aily.

"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressin Boris, "we
will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to me
after the review and we will do what is possible."

And, havin lanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now chanin to
aner he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you were
talkin of the Schon rabern affair? Were you there?"

"I was there," said Rostov anrily, as if intendin to insult the aide-
de-camp.

Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a
slihtly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories now
told about that affair!"

"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, lookin with eyes suddenly rown
furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our
stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Our
stories have some weiht, not like the stories of those fellows on the
staff who et rewards without doin anythin!"

"Of whom you imaine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and
particularly amiable smile.

A strane feelin of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
self-possession minled at that moment in Rostov's soul.

"I am not talkin about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I
don't want to. I am speakin of the staff in eneral."

"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quiet
authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to aree with you that
it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,
but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two
we shall all have to take part in a reater and more serious duel, and
besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at
all to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"
he added risin, "you know my name and where to find me, but don't
foret that I do not reard either myself or you as havin been at all
insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matter
drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,
Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them
both he went out.

Only when Prince Andrew was one did Rostov think of what he ouht to
have said. And he was still more anry at havin omitted to say it. He
ordered his horse at once and, coldly takin leave of Boris, rode home.
Should he o to headquarters next day and challene that affected
adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worried
him all the way. He thouht anrily of the pleasure he would have at
seein the friht of that small and frail but proud man when covered by
his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew
there was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very
adjutant whom he so hated.




CHAPTER VIII

The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of the
Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia and
those who had been campainin under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the
Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,
inspected the allied army of eihty thousand men.

From early mornin the smart clean troops were on the move, formin up
on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonets
moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flyin,
formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of
infantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs
and the jinlin of showy cavalry in blue, red, and reen braided
uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,
or ray horses; then aain, spreadin out with the brazen clatter of the
polished shinin cannon that quivered on the un carriaes and with the
smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between the
infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the
enerals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn
in to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and
wearin scarves and all their decorations, not only the eleant, pomaded
officers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and
his weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse roomed
till its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay
smooth--felt that no small matter was happenin, but an important and
solemn affair. Every eneral and every soldier was conscious of his own
insinificance, aware of bein but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet
at the same time was conscious of his strenth as a part of that
enormous whole.

From early mornin strenuous activities and efforts had beun and by ten
o'clock all had been brouht into due order. The ranks were drawn up on
the vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalry
in front, behind it the artillery, and behind that aain the infantry.

A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. The
three parts of that army were sharply distinuished: Kutuzov's fihtin
army (with the Pavlorads on the riht flank of the front); those
recently arrived from Russia, both uards and reiments of the line; and
the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one
command, and in a like order.

Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're comin! They're
comin!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation
swept over all the troops.

From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a roup was seen
approachin. And at that moment, thouh the day was still, a liht ust
of wind blowin over the army slihtly stirred the streamers on the
lances and the unfolded standards fluttered aainst their staffs. It
looked as if by that sliht motion the army itself was expressin its
joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shoutin: "Eyes
front!" Then, like the crowin of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated by
others from various sides and all became silent.

In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was
the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and the
trumpets of the first cavalry reiment played the eneral march. It
seemed as thouh not the trumpeters were playin, but as if the army
itself, rejoicin at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor
Alexander was clearly heard. He ave the words of reetin, and the
first reiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeninly, continuously, and
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
immensity of the power they constituted.

Rostov, standin in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar
approached first, experienced the same feelin as every other man in
that army: a feelin of self-foretfulness, a proud consciousness of
miht, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this
triumph.

He felt that at a sinle word from that man all this vast mass (and he
himself an insinificant atom in it) would o throuh fire and water,
commit crime, die, or perform deeds of hihest heroism, and so he could
not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one reiment after
another reetin the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then
"Hurrah!"... Then the eneral march, and aain "Hurrah! Hurrah!" rowin
ever stroner and fuller and merin into a deafenin roar.

Till the Tsar reached it, each reiment in its silence and immobility
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
its thunder joinin the roar of the whole line alon which he had
already passed. Throuh the terrible and deafenin roar of those voices,
amid the square masses of troops standin motionless as if turned to
stone, hundreds of riders composin the suites moved carelessly but
symmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--the
Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of that
whole mass of men was concentrated.

The handsome youn Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horse
uards, wearin a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his
pleasant face and resonant thouh not loud voice, attracted everyone's
attention.

Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen siht had
reconized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twenty
paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinuish every detail of his
handsome, happy youn face, he experienced a feelin of tenderness and
ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and every
movement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchantin.

Stoppin in front of the Pavlorads, the Tsar said somethin in French
to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.

Seein that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a still
stroner flow of love for his soverein. He loned to show that love in
some way and knowin that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsar
called the colonel of the reiment and said a few words to him.

"Oh od, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thouht
Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"

The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, entlemen, I
thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a
voice from heaven. How ladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!

"You have earned the St. eore's standards and will be worthy of them."

"Oh, to die, to die for him," thouht Rostov.

The Tsar said somethin more which Rostov did not hear, and the
soldiers, strainin their luns, shouted "Hurrah!"

Rostov too, bendin over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his
miht, feelin that he would like to injure himself by that shout, if
only to express his rapture fully.

The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.

"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thouht Rostov, but then even this
indecision appeared to him majestic and enchantin, like everythin else
the Tsar did.

That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrow
pointed boot then fashionable, touched the roin of the bobtailed bay
mare he rode, his hand in a white love athered up the reins, and he
moved off accompanied by an irreularly swayin sea of aides-de-camp.
Farther and farther he rode away, stoppin at other reiments, till at
last only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suites
that surrounded the Emperors.

Amon the entlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sittin his
horse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarrel of
yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ouht or ouht
not to challene Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thouht. "Is it
worth thinkin or speakin of it at such a moment? At a time of such
love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrels
and affronts matter? I love and forive everybody now."

When the Emperor had passed nearly all the reiments, the troops bean a
ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased
from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron--that is, alone
and in full view of the Emperor.

Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman, spurred
Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the
animal went when excited. Bendin his foamin muzzle to his chest, his
tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye upon
him, passed splendidly, liftin his feet with a hih and raceful
action, as if flyin throuh the air without touchin the round.

Rostov himself, his les well back and his stomach drawn in and feelin
himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frownin but
blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.

"Fine fellows, the Pavlorads!" remarked the Emperor.

"My od, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the fire
this instant!" thouht Rostov.

When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and also
Kutuzov's, collected in roups and bean to talk about the awards, about
the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about Bonaparte,
and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the Essen corps
arrived and Prussia took our side.

But the talk in every roup was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His
every word and movement was described with ecstasy.

They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible aainst the
enemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself they
could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it miht: so thouht
Rostov and most of the officers after the review.

All were then more confident of victory than the winnin of two battles
would have made them.




CHAPTER IX

The day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with his
comrade Ber's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski,
wishin to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the best
post he could--preferably that of adjutant to some important personae,
a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive. "It is all
very well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a
time, to talk about not wishin to crine to anybody and not be anyone's
lackey, but I who have nothin but my brains have to make a career and
must not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of them!" he
reflected.

He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of
the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed
and the two Emperors were livin with their suites, households, and
courts only strenthened his desire to belon to that hiher world.

He knew no one, and despite his smart uardsman's uniform, all these
exalted personaes passin in the streets in their eleant carriaes
with their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military men,
seemed so immeasurably above him, an insinificant officer of the
uards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, be
aware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander-in-chief,
Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even the
orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a reat
many officers like him were always comin there and that everybody was
heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of it, next
day, November 15, after dinner he aain went to Olmutz and, enterin the
house occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and
Boris was shown into a lare hall probably formerly used for dancin,
but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of various kinds: a
table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, was
sittin at the table in a Persian dressin own, writin. Another, the
red, stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head,
lauhin with an officer who had sat down beside him. A third was
playin a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lyin on the
clavichord, san the tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of these
entlemen chaned his position on seein Boris. The one who was writin
and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski was
on duty and that he should o throuh the door on the left into the
reception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went to
the reception room, where he found some ten officers and enerals.

When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes droopin contemptuously (with
that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, "If it
were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was listenin
to an old Russian eneral with decorations, who stood very erect, almost
on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his purple face,
reportin somethin.

"Very well, then, be so ood as to wait," said Prince Andrew to the
eneral, in Russian, speakin with the French intonation he affected
when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticin Boris, Prince
Andrew, payin no more heed to the eneral who ran after him implorin
him to hear somethin more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerful
smile.

At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, that
in the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in the
military code, which he and the others knew in the reiment, there was
another, more important, subordination, which made this tiht-laced,
purple-faced eneral wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, for
his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More than
ever was Boris resolved to serve in future not accordin to the written
code, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by havin
been recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the eneral
who at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the
uards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.

"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussin about
with ermans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.
When ermans start bein accurate, there's no end to it!"

Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alludin to as
somethin enerally known. But it was the first time he had heard
Weyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions."

"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been
thinkin about you."

"Yes, I was thinkin"--for some reason Boris could not help blushin--
"of askin the commander-in-chief. He has had a letter from Prince
Kurain about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the uards won't
be in action," he added as if in apoloy.

"All riht, all riht. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew. "Only
let me report this entleman's business, and I shall be at your
disposal."

While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced eneral, that
entleman--evidently not sharin Boris' conception of the advantaes of
the unwritten code of subordination--looked so fixedly at the
presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishin what he had to
say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away and
waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the commander-in-
chief's room.

"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinkin about you," said Prince
Andrew when they had one into the lare room where the clavichord was.
"It's no use your oin to the commander-in-chief. He would say a lot of
pleasant thins, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as reards
the unwritten code," thouht Boris), "but nothin more would come of it.
There will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants! But
this is what we'll do: I have a ood friend, an adjutant eneral and an
excellent fellow, Prince Dolorukov; and thouh you may not know it, the
fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothin.
Everythin is now centered round the Emperor. So we will o to
Dolorukov; I have to o there anyhow and I have already spoken to him
about you. We shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find
a place for you somewhere nearer the sun."

Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to uide a youn
man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtainin help of
this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for
himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and
which attracted him. He very readily took up Boris' cause and went with
him to Dolorukov.

It was late in the evenin when they entered the palace at Olmutz
occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.

That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members of
the Hofkriesrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contrary
to the views of the old enerals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenber, it
had been decided to advance immediately and ive battle to Bonaparte.
The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris
arrived at the palace to find Dolorukov. Everyone at headquarters was
still under the spell of the day's council, at which the party of the
youn had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled delay and advised
waitin for somethin else before advancin had been so completely
silenced and their aruments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the
advantaes of attackin that what had been discussed at the council--the
comin battle and the victory that would certainly result from it--no
loner seemed to be in the future but in the past. All the advantaes
were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superior to
Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired by the
Emperors' presence were eaer for action. The strateic position where
the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to the
Austrian eneral Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that the
Austrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where
the French had now to be fouht; the adjacent locality was known and
shown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened,
was undertakin nothin.

Dolorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned
from the council, tired and exhausted but eaer and proud of the victory
that had been ained. Prince Andrew introduced his protee, but Prince
Dolorukov politely and firmly pressin his hand said nothin to Boris
and, evidently unable to suppress the thouhts which were uppermost in
his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.

"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have ained! od rant that the
one that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dear
fellow," he said abruptly and eaerly, "I must confess to havin been
unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude,
what minuteness, what knowlede of the locality, what foresiht for
every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest detail! No, my
dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have been
devised. This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor--what
more could be wished for?"

"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.

"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has
decidedly lost bearins, you know that a letter was received from him
today for the Emperor." Dolorukov smiled sinificantly.

"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.

"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to ain time. I
tell you he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusin,"
he continued, with a sudden, ood-natured lauh, "was that we could not
think how to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as
'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'eneral Bonaparte.'"

"But between not reconizin him as Emperor and callin him eneral
Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.

"That's just it," interrupted Dolorukov quickly, lauhin. "You know
Bilibin--he's a very clever fellow. He suested addressin him as
'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"

Dolorukov lauhed merrily.

"Only that?" said Bolkonski.

"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address.
He is a wise and clever fellow."

"What was it?"

"To the Head of the French overnment... Au chef du ouvernement
francais," said Dolorukov, with rave satisfaction. "ood, wasn't it?"

"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.

"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him--the
present Emperor--more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met a
more cunnin or subtle diplomatist--you know, a combination of French
adroitness and Italian play-actin! Do you know the tale about him and
Count Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him.
You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delihtful!"

And the talkative Dolorukov, turnin now to Boris, now to Prince
Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishin to test Markov, our ambassador,
purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood lookin at
Markov, probably expectin Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markov
immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touchin
Bonaparte's.

"Delihtful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as a
petitioner on behalf of this youn man. You see..." but before Prince
Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon Dolorukov to the
Emperor.

"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolorukov, ettin up hurriedly and
pressin the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should be
very lad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear youn
man." Aain he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression of
ood-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... another
time!"

Boris was excited by the thouht of bein so close to the hiher powers
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here he
was in contact with the sprins that set in motion the enormous
movements of the mass of which in his reiment he felt himself a tiny,
obedient, and insinificant atom. They followed Prince Dolorukov out
into the corridor and met--comin out of the door of the Emperor's room
by which Dolorukov had entered--a short man in civilian clothes with a
clever face and sharply projectin jaw which, without spoilin his face,
ave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This short
man nodded to Dolorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince
Andrew with cool intensity, walkin straiht toward him and evidently
expectin him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew did
neither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turned
away and went down the side of the corridor.

"Who was that?" asked Boris.

"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men--the
Minister of Forein Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such men
as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sih he
could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.

Next day, the army bean its campain, and up to the very battle of
Austerlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolorukov
aain and remained for a while with the Ismaylov reiment.




CHAPTER X

At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in which
Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Baration's detachment,
moved from the place where it had spent the niht, advancin into action
as arraned, and after oin behind other columns for about two thirds
of a mile was stopped on the hihroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and then
the first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions and
artillery pass by and o forward and then enerals Baration and
Dolorukov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear before action
which he had experienced as previously, all the inner strule to
conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinuishin himself as a true
hussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron remained in
reserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood.
At nine in the mornin, he heard firin in front and shouts of hurrah,
and saw wounded bein brouht back (there were not many of them), and at
last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brouht in,
convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and,
thouh not bi, had been a successful enaement. The men and officers
returnin spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of
Wischau and the capture of a whole French squadron. The day was briht
and sunny after a sharp niht frost, and the cheerful litter of that
autumn day was in keepin with the news of victory which was conveyed,
not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by the
joyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, enerals, and
adjutants, as they passed Rostov oin or comin. And Nicholas, who had
vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that
happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.

"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our wief!" shouted Denisov,
who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.

The officers athered round Denisov's canteen, eatin and talkin.

"There! They are brinin another!" cried one of the officers,
indicatin a captive French draoon who was bein brouht in on foot by
two Cossacks.

One of them was leadin by the bridle a fine lare French horse he had
taken from the prisoner.

"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.

"If you like, your honor!"

The officers ot up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner. The
French draoon was a youn Alsatian who spoke French with a erman
accent. He was breathless with aitation, his face was red, and when he
heard some French spoken he at once bean speakin to the officers,
addressin first one, then another. He said he would not have been
taken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him to seize
some horsecloths, thouh he had told him the Russians were there. And at
every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!" and stroked the
animal. It was plain that he did not quite rasp where he was. Now he
excused himself for havin been taken prisoner and now, imainin
himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline
and zeal in the service. He brouht with him into our rearuard all the
freshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was so alien to us.

The Cossacks sold the horse for two old pieces, and Rostov, bein the
richest of the officers now that he had received his money, bouht it.

"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian ood-naturedly to
Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.

Rostov smilinly reassured the draoon and ave him money.

"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touchin the prisoner's arm to make
him o on.

"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard amon the hussars.

All bean to run and bustle, and Rostov saw comin up the road behind
him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyone
was in his place, waitin.

Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.
Instantly his reret at not havin been in action and his dejected mood
amid people of whom he was weary had one, instantly every thouht of
himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to
the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the
day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the loned-for moment of
meetin arrives. Not darin to look round and without lookin round, he
was ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from the
sound of the hoofs of the approachin cavalcade, but because as he drew
near everythin rew brihter, more joyful, more sinificant, and more
festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun sheddin
beams of mild and majestic liht around, and already he felt himself
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and
majestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with Rostov's
feelin, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard the
Emperor's voice.

"The Pavlorad hussars?" he inquired.

"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared to that
which had said: "The Pavlorad hussars?"

The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face was even
more beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. It
shone with such aiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suested
the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face of
the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveyin the squadron, the
Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than two
seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was oin on in
Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood everythin), at
any rate his liht-blue eyes azed for about two seconds into Rostov's
face. A entle, mild liht poured from them. Then all at once he raised
his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and
alloped on.

The youner Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve
o'clock left the third column with which he had been and alloped toward
the vanuard. Before he came up with the hussars, several adjutants met
him with news of the successful result of the action.

This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, was
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the Emperor
and the whole army, especially while the smoke hun over the
battlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and were
retreatin aainst their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
passed, the Pavlorad division was ordered to advance. In Wischau
itself, a petty erman town, Rostov saw the Emperor aain. In the market
place, where there had been some rather heavy firin before the
Emperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there
had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite of
officers and courtiers, was ridin a bobtailed chestnut mare, a
different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bendin
to one side he racefully held a old lornette to his eyes and looked
at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The
wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revoltin that his proximity
to the Emperor shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather round
shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his left
foot bean convulsively tappin the horse's side with the spur, and how
the well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not stir. An
adjutant, dismountin, lifted the soldier under the arms to place him on
a stretcher that had been brouht. The soldier roaned.

"ently, ently! Can't you do it more ently?" said the Emperor
apparently sufferin more than the dyin soldier, and he rode away.

Rostov saw tears fillin the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was
ridin away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thin war is: what a
terrible thin! Quelle terrible chose que la uerre!"

The troops of the vanuard were stationed before Wischau, within siht
of the enemy's lines, which all day lon had yielded round to us at the
least firin. The Emperor's ratitude was announced to the vanuard,
rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of vodka.
The campfires crackled and the soldiers' sons resounded even more
merrily than on the previous niht. Denisov celebrated his promotion to
the rank of major, and Rostov, who had already drunk enouh, at the end
of the feast proposed the Emperor's health. "Not 'our Soverein, the
Emperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health of
our Soverein, that ood, enchantin, and reat man! Let us drink to his
health and to the certain defeat of the French!"

"If we fouht before," he said, "not lettin the French pass, as at
Schon rabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We will
all die for him ladly! Is it not so, entlemen? Perhaps I am not sayin
it riht, I have drunk a ood deal--but that is how I feel, and so do
you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" ran the enthusiastic voices of the officers.

And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and no
less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.

When the officers had emptied and smashed their lasses, Kirsten filled
others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went lass in hand to the
soldiers' bonfires and with his lon ray mustache, his white chest
showin under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the liht
of the campfire, wavin his uplifted arm.

"Lads! here's to our Soverein, the Emperor, and victory over our
enemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashin, old, hussar's baritone.

The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.

Late that niht, when all had separated, Denisov with his short hand
patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.

"As there's no one to fall in love with on campain, he's fallen in love
with the Tsar," he said.

"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty,
beautiful feelin, such a..."

"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."

"No, you don't understand!"

And Rostov ot up and went wanderin amon the campfires, dreamin of
what happiness it would be to die--not in savin the Emperor's life (he
did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his eyes.
He really was in love with the Tsar and the lory of the Russian arms
and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man to
experience that feelin durin those memorable days precedin the battle
of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then in
love, thouh less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the lory of the
Russian arms.




CHAPTER XI

The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician,
was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and amon the troops
near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothin and
had slept badly that niht, those around him reported. The cause of this
indisposition was the stron impression made on his sensitive mind by
the siht of the killed and wounded.

At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with a
fla of truce, demandin an audience with the Russian Emperor, was
brouht into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday
he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with
Prince Dolorukov to the advanced post of the French army.

It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander a
meetin with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, a
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Soverein, Prince
Dolorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to neotiate
with Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these neotiations were
actuated by a real desire for peace.

Toward evenin Dolorukov came back, went straiht to the Tsar, and
remained alone with him for a lon time.

On the eihteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced two
days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchane of shots
retreated. In the hihest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, a
reat, excitedly bustlin activity bean which lasted till the mornin
of the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fouht.

Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eaer talk, runnin to
and fro, and dispatchin of adjutants--was confined to the Emperor's
headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reached
Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns. By
evenin, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the army,
and in the niht from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole eihty
thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of voices,
and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles lon.

The concentrated activity which had beun at the Emperor's headquarters
in the mornin and had started the whole movement that followed was like
the first movement of the main wheel of a lare tower clock. One wheel
slowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels bean
to revolve faster and faster, levers and cowheels to work, chimes to
play, fiures to pop out, and the hands to advance with reular motion
as a result of all that activity.

Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the military
machine, an impulse once iven leads to the final result; and just as
indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted to
them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet
reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cos enae one another and
the revolvin pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a
neihborin wheel is as quiet and motionless as thouh it were prepared
to remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the lever
catches it and obeyin the impulse that wheel beins to creak and joins
in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.

Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerable
wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and reular movement of the hands
which show the time, so the result of all the complicated human
activities of 160,000 Russians and French--all their passions, desires,
remorse, humiliations, sufferins, outbursts of pride, fear, and
enthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called
battle of the three Emperors--that is to say, a slow movement of the
hand on the dial of human history.

Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the
commander-in-chief.

At six in the evenin, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquarters and
after stayin but a short time with the Tsar went to see the rand
marshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.

Bolkonski took the opportunity to o in to et some details of the
comin action from Dolorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and
dissatisfied about somethin and that at headquarters they were
dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarters
everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know somethin others do
not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolorukov.

"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolorukov, who was sittin
at tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your old fellow?
Out of sorts?"

"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be heard."

"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when he
talks sense, but to temporize and wait for somethin now when Bonaparte
fears nothin so much as a eneral battle is impossible."

"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonaparte
like? How did he impress you?"

"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothin so much as a
eneral enaement," repeated Dolorukov, evidently prizin this eneral
conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon. "If
he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why
neotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary to
his method of conductin war? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a
eneral battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!"

"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew aain.

"He is a man in a ray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him
'Your Majesty,' but who, to his charin, ot no title from me! That's
the sort of man he is, and nothin more," replied Dolorukov, lookin
round at Bilibin with a smile.

"Despite my reat respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should be
a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so ive him a chance
to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in our hands!
No, we mustn't foret Suvorov and his rule--not to put yourself in a
position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe me in war the
enery of youn men often shows the way better than all the experience
of old Cunctators."

"But in what position are we oin to attack him? I have been at the
outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces are
situated," said Prince Andrew.

He wished to explain to Dolorukov a plan of attack he had himself
formed.

"Oh, that is all the same," Dolorukov said quickly, and ettin up he
spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been foreseen. If he
is standin before Brunn..."

And Prince Dolorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother's
plan of a flankin movement.

Prince Andrew bean to reply and to state his own plan, which miht have
been as ood as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantae that Weyrother's
had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew bean to demonstrate
the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan, Prince
Dolorukov ceased to listen to him and azed absent-mindedly not at the
map, but at Prince Andrew's face.

"There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's toniht, thouh; you can
say all this there," remarked Dolorukov.

"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, movin away from the map.

"Whatever are you botherin about, entlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till
then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and now
was evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow brins victory or
defeat, the lory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your Kutuzov,
there is not a sinle Russian in command of a column! The commanders
are: Herr eneral Wimpfen, le Comte de Laneron, le Prince de
Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on
like all those Polish names."

"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolorukov. "It is not true; there are now
two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third,
Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."

"However, I think eneral Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew. "I
wish you ood luck and success, entlemen!" he added and went out after
shakin hands with Dolorukov and Bilibin.

On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from askin Kutuzov,
who was sittin silently beside him, what he thouht of tomorrow's
battle.

Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: "I
think the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked him
to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But, my dear
eneral, I am enaed with rice and cutlets, look after military matters
yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I ot!"




CHAPTER XII

Shortly after nine o'clock that evenin, Weyrother drove with his plans
to Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held. All the
commanders of columns were summoned to the commander-in-chief's and with
the exception of Prince Baration, who declined to come, were all there
at the appointed time.

Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by his
eaerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied
and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and
president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to be
at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He was
like a horse runnin downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was
pullin it or bein pushed by it he did not know, but rushed alon at
headlon speed with no time to consider what this movement miht lead
to. Weyrother had been twice that evenin to the enemy's picket line to
reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and Austrian,
to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had dictated the
dispositions in erman, and now, much exhausted, he arrived at
Kutuzov's.

He was evidently so busy that he even forot to be polite to the
commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,
without lookin at the man he was addressin, and did not reply to
questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,
weary, and distracted air, thouh at the same time he was hauhty and
self-confident.

Kutuzov was occupyin a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near
Ostralitz. In the lare drawin room which had become the commander in
chief's office were athered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the members
of the council of war. They were drinkin tea, and only awaited Prince
Baration to bein the council. At last Baration's orderly came with
the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in to
inform the commander-in-chief of this and, availin himself of
permission previously iven him by Kutuzov to be present at the council,
he remained in the room.

"Since Prince Baration is not comin, we may bein," said Weyrother,
hurriedly risin from his seat and oin up to the table on which an
enormous map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.

Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck buled over
his collar as if escapin, was sittin almost asleep in a low chair,
with his pody old hands restin symmetrically on its arms. At the sound
of Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.

"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and noddin his
head he let it droop and aain closed his eye.

If at first the members of the council thouht that Kutuzov was
pretendin to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted durin the readin that
followed proved that the commander-in-chief at that moment was absorbed
by a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for the
dispositions or anythin else--he was enaed in satisfyin the
irresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, with
the esture of a man too busy to lose a moment, lanced at Kutuzov and,
havin convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in a
loud, monotonous voice bean to read out the dispositions for the
impendin battle, under a headin which he also read out:

"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and
Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."

The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They bean as
follows:

"As the enemy's left win rests on wooded hills and his riht extends
alon Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we,
on the other hand, with our left win by far outflank his riht, it is
advantaeous to attack the enemy's latter win especially if we occupy
the villaes of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on his
flank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and the
Thuerassa forest, avoidin the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz
which cover the enemy's front. For this object it is necessary that...
The first column marches... The second column marches... The third
column marches..." and so on, read Weyrother.

The enerals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
The tall, fair-haired eneral Buxhowden stood, leanin his back aainst
the wall, his eyes fixed on a burnin candle, and seemed not to listen
or even to wish to be thouht to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,
with his listenin wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustache
twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovich in a military pose, his
elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shoulders
raised. He remained stubbornly silent, azin at Weyrother's face, and
only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished
readin. Then Miloradovich looked round sinificantly at the other
enerals. But one could not tell from that sinificant look whether he
areed or disareed and was satisfied or not with the arranements. Next
to Weyrother sat Count Laneron who, with a subtle smile that never left
his typically southern French face durin the whole time of the readin,
azed at his delicate finers which rapidly twirled by its corners a
old snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the
lonest sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised
his head, and with inimical politeness lurkin in the corners of his
thin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishin to say somethin. But the
Austrian eneral, continuin to read, frowned anrily and jerked his
elbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so
ood as to look at the map and listen." Laneron lifted his eyes with an
expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seekin an
explanation, but meetin the latter's impressive but meaninless aze
drooped his eyes sadly and aain took to twirlin his snuffbox.

"A eoraphy lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enouh to
be heard.

Przebyszewski, with respectful but dinified politeness, held his hand
to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
attention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with an
assiduous and modest mien, and stoopin over the outspread map
conscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. He
asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard
and the difficult names of villaes. Weyrother complied and Dohkturov
noted them down.

When the readin which lasted more than an hour was over, Laneron aain
brouht his snuffbox to rest and, without lookin at Weyrother or at
anyone in particular, bean to say how difficult it was to carry out
such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,
whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.
Laneron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief aim
was to show eneral Weyrother--who had read his dispositions with as
much self-confidence as if he were addressin school children--that he
had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him somethin in
military matters.

When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
is interrupted. He listened to what Laneron said, as if remarkin, "So
you are still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye aain, and
let his head sink still lower.

Laneron, tryin as virulently as possible to stin Weyrother's vanity
as author of the military plan, arued that Bonaparte miht easily
attack instead of bein attacked, and so render the whole of this plan
perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm and
contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objections
be they what they miht.

"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.

"So you think he is powerless?" said Laneron.

"He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smile
of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of a
case.

"In that case he is invitin his doom by awaitin our attack," said
Laneron, with a subtly ironical smile, aain lancin round for support
to Miloradovich who was near him.

But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinkin of anythin
rather than of what the enerals were disputin about.

"Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield."

Weyrother aain ave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
strane and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian enerals and to
have to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but
had also convinced the soverein Emperors of.

"The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard from
his camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreatin, which
is the only thin we need fear, or he is chanin his position." (He
smiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up a position in the
Thuerassa, he merely saves us a reat deal of trouble and all our
arranements to the minutest detail remain the same."

"How is that?..." bean Prince Andrew, who had for lon been waitin an
opportunity to express his doubts.

Kutuzov here woke up, couhed heavily, and looked round at the enerals.

"entlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today, for it
is past midniht--cannot now be altered," said he. "You have heard them,
and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is nothin more
important..." he paused, "than to have a ood sleep."

He moved as if to rise. The enerals bowed and retired. It was past
midniht. Prince Andrew went out.

The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to express
his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vaue and uneasy
impression. Whether Dolorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Laneron, and
the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were riht--he did
not know. "But was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his views
plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on account of court and
personal considerations tens of thousands of lives, and my life, my
life," he thouht, "must be risked?"

"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," he thouht.
And suddenly, at this thouht of death, a whole series of most distant,
most intimate, memories rose in his imaination: he remembered his last
partin from his father and his wife; he remembered the days when he
first loved her. He thouht of her prenancy and felt sorry for her and
for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went out
of the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvitski and bean to walk up
and down before it.

The niht was foy and throuh the fo the moonliht leamed
mysteriously. "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thouht. "Tomorrow
everythin may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, none
of them will have any meanin for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly,
I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all I
can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concentration
of fihtin at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders. And
then that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so lon waited,
presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly expresses his
opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors. All are struck by
the justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, so
he takes a reiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interfere
with his arranements--leads his division to the decisive point, and
ains the victory alone. "But death and sufferin?" suested another
voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not answer that voice and went on
dreamin of his triumphs. The dispositions for the next battle are
planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's
staff, but he does everythin alone. The next battle is won by him
alone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?" asked
the other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed,
or betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered
himself, "I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and
can't, but if I want this--want lory, want to be known to men, want to
be loved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothin but
that and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never tell
anyone, but, oh od! what am I to do if I love nothin but fame and
men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothin. And
precious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife--those
dearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would ive them
all at once for a moment of lory, of triumph over men, of love from men
I don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," he
thouht, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voices
were those of the orderlies who were packin up; one voice, probably a
coachman's, was teasin Kutuzov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, and
who was called Tit. He was sayin, "Tit, I say, Tit!"

"Well?" returned the old man.

"o, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wa.

"Oh, o to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the lauhter of
the orderlies and servants.

"All the same, I love and value nothin but triumph over them all, I
value this mystic power and lory that is floatin here above me in this
mist!"




CHAPTER XIII

That same niht, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishin duty in front
of Baration's detachment. His hussars were placed alon the line in
couples and he himself rode alon the line tryin to master the
sleepiness that kept comin over him. An enormous space, with our army's
campfires dimly lowin in the fo, could be seen behind him; in front
of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothin, peer as he would
into that foy distance: now somethin leamed ray, now there was
somethin black, now little lihts seemed to limmer where the enemy
ouht to be, now he fancied it was only somethin in his own eyes. His
eyes kept closin, and in his fancy appeared--now the Emperor, now
Denisov, and now Moscow memories--and he aain hurriedly opened his eyes
and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was ridin,
and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black fiures
of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness. "Why
not?... It miht easily happen," thouht Rostov, "that the Emperor will
meet me and ive me an order as he would to any other officer; he'll
say: 'o and find out what's there.' There are many stories of his
ettin to know an officer in just such a chance way and attachin him
to himself! What if he ave me a place near him? Oh, how I would uard
him, how I would tell him the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!"
And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the soverein,
Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful erman, whom he would
not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before
the Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and opened
his eyes.

"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishin line... pass and watchword--
shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve
tomorrow," he thouht. "I'll ask leave to o to the front, this may be
my only chance of seein the Emperor. It won't be lon now before I am
off duty. I'll take another turn and when I et back I'll o to the
eneral and ask him." He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up
his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It seemed to him that it
was ettin lihter. To the left he saw a slopin descent lit up, and
facin it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knoll
there was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out: was it a
lade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some unmelted snow, or some
white houses? He even thouht somethin moved on that white spot. "I
expect it's snow... that spot... a spot--une tache," he thouht. "There
now... it's not a tache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na...
tasha... (Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen the
Emperor?) Natasha... take my sabretache..."--"Keep to the riht, your
honor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom
Rostov was ridin in the act of fallin asleep. Rostov lifted his head
that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside the
hussar. He was succumbin to irresistible, youthful, childish
drowsiness. "But what was I thinkin? I mustn't foret. How shall I
speak to the Emperor? No, that's not it--that's tomorrow. Oh yes!
Natasha... sabretache... saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the
hussars with mustaches. Alon the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with
mustaches... I thouht about him too, just opposite uryev's house...
Old uryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense.
The chief thin is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and
wished to say somethin, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not.
But that's nonsense, the chief thin is not to foret the important
thin I was thinkin of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's
riht!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck. All at once it
seemed to him that he was bein fired at. "What? What? What?... Cut them
down! What?..." said Rostov, wakin up. At the moment he opened his eyes
he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the lon-drawn shouts of
thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar near him
pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the shoutin came
from, a fire flared up and went out aain, then another, and all alon
the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shoutin rew louder
and louder. Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not
distinuish them. The din of many voices was too reat; all he could
hear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!"

"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside
him. "That must be the enemy's camp!"

The hussar did not reply.

"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked aain, after waitin for a reply.

"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly.

"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.

"It may be he or it may be nothin," muttered the hussar. "It's dark...
Steady!" he cried to his fidetin horse.

Rostov's horse was also ettin restive: it pawed the frozen round,
prickin its ears at the noise and lookin at the lihts. The shoutin
rew still louder and mered into a eneral roar that only an army of
several thousand men could produce. The lihts spread farther and
farther, probably alon the line of the French camp. Rostov no loner
wanted to sleep. The ay triumphant shoutin of the enemy army had a
stimulatin effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now heard
distinctly.

"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to the
hussar beside him.

The hussar only sihed without replyin and couhed anrily. The sound
of horse's hoofs approachin at a trot alon the line of hussars was
heard, and out of the foy darkness the fiure of a sereant of hussars
suddenly appeared, loomin hue as an elephant.

"Your honor, the enerals!" said the sereant, ridin up to Rostov.

Rostov, still lookin round toward the fires and the shouts, rode with
the sereant to meet some mounted men who were ridin alon the line.
One was on a white horse. Prince Baration and Prince Dolorukov with
their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lihts
and shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Baration, reported to
him, and then joined the adjutants listenin to what the enerals were
sayin.

"Believe me," said Prince Dolorukov, addressin Baration, "it is
nothin but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearuard to
kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us."

"Hardly," said Baration. "I saw them this evenin on that knoll; if
they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Officer!"
said Baration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"

"They were there this evenin, but now I don't know, your excellency.
Shall I o with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.

Baration stopped and, before replyin, tried to see Rostov's face in
the mist.

"Well, o and see," he said, after a pause.

"Yes, sir."

Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sereant Fedchenko and two other
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
from which the shoutin came. He felt both frihtened and pleased to be
ridin alone with three hussars into that mysterious and danerous misty
distance where no one had been before him. Baration called to him from
the hill not to o beyond the stream, but Rostov pretended not to hear
him and did not stop but rode on and on, continually mistakin bushes
for trees and ullies for men and continually discoverin his mistakes.
Havin descended the hill at a trot, he no loner saw either our own or
the enemy's fires, but heard the shoutin of the French more loudly and
distinctly. In the valley he saw before him somethin like a river, but
when he reached it he found it was a road. Havin come out onto the road
he reined in his horse, hesitatin whether to ride alon it or cross it
and ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road which
leamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would be
easier to see people comin alon it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed the
road, and bean ridin up the hill at a allop toward the point where
the French pickets had been standin that evenin.

"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. And
before Rostov had time to make out what the black thin was that had
suddenly appeared in the fo, there was a flash, followed by a report,
and a bullet whizzin hih up in the mist with a plaintive sound passed
out of hearin. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.
Rostov turned his horse and alloped back. Four more reports followed at
intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fo sinin in
different tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,
like his own, at the firin, and went back at a footpace. "Well, some
more! Some more!" a merry voice was sayin in his soul. But no more
shots came.

Only when approachin Baration did Rostov let his horse allop aain,
and with his hand at the salute rode up to the eneral.

Dolorukov was still insistin that the French had retreated and had
only lit fires to deceive us.

"What does that prove?" he was sayin as Rostov rode up. "They miht
retreat and leave the pickets."

"It's plain that they have not all one yet, Prince," said Baration.
"Wait till tomorrow mornin, we'll find out everythin tomorrow."

"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was in
the evenin," reported Rostov, stoopin forward with his hand at the
salute and unable to repress the smile of deliht induced by his ride
and especially by the sound of the bullets.

"Very ood, very ood," said Baration. "Thank you, officer."

"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"

"What is it?"

"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached to
the first squadron?"

"What's your name?"

"Count Rostov."

"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me."

"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolorukov.

But Rostov did not reply.

"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"

"I will ive the order."

"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some messae to the Emperor,"
thouht Rostov.

"Thank od!"

The fires and shoutin in the enemy's army were occasioned by the fact
that while Napoleon's proclamation was bein read to the troops the
Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seein him,
lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shoutin, "Vive l'Empereur!"
Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:

Soldiers! The Russian army is advancin aainst you to avene the
Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we
occupy is a stron one, and while they are marchin to o round me on
the riht they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct
your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valor
carry disorder and confusion into the enemy's ranks, but should victory
be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor exposin
himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no doubt of
victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of
the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.

Do not break your ranks on the plea of removin the wounded! Let every
man be fully imbued with the thouht that we must defeat these hirelins
of Enland, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory will
conclude our campain and we can return to winter quarters, where fresh
French troops who are bein raised in France will join us, and the peace
I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.

NAPOLEON




CHAPTER XIV

At five in the mornin it was still quite dark. The troops of the
center, the reserves, and Baration's riht flank had not yet moved, but
on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, which
were to be the first to descend the heihts to attack the French riht
flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains accordin to plan, were
already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they were
throwin everythin superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold and
dark. The officers were hurriedly drinkin tea and breakfastin, the
soldiers, munchin biscuit and beatin a tattoo with their feet to warm
themselves, atherin round the fires throwin into the flames the
remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everythin that they
did not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column uides
were movin in and out amon the Russian troops and served as heralds of
the advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near a
commandin officer's quarters, the reiment bean to move: the soldiers
ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their bas into
the carts, ot their muskets ready, and formed rank. The officers
buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved
alon the ranks shoutin. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and
packed the waons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion and
reimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, ave final
instructions, orders, and commissions to the baae men who remained
behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded. The
column moved forward without knowin where and unable, from the masses
around them, the smoke and the increasin fo, to see either the place
they were leavin or that to which they were oin.

A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne alon by his reiment as
much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whatever
strane, unknown, and danerous places he reaches, just as a sailor is
always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and riin of his ship, so
the soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks, the
same sereant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company do Jack, and the
same commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which
his ship is sailin, but on the day of battle--heaven knows how and
whence--a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moral
atmosphere of an army, announcin the approach of somethin decisive and
solemn, and awakenin in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of
battle the soldiers excitedly try to et beyond the interests of their
reiment, they listen intently, look about, and eaerly ask concernin
what is oin on around them.

The fo had rown so dense that thouh it was rowin liht they could
not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like iantic trees and level
round like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one miht
encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced for
a lon time, always in the same fo, descendin and ascendin hills,
avoidin ardens and enclosures, oin over new and unknown round, and
nowhere encounterin the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers became
aware that in front, behind, and on all sides, other Russian columns
were movin in the same direction. Every soldier felt lad to know that
to the unknown place where he was oin, many more of our men were oin
too.

"There now, the Kurskies have also one past," was bein said in the
ranks.

"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have athered, lads! Last niht
I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A reular
Moscow!"

Thouh none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselves
to cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troops
marched aily, as they always do when oin into action, especially to
an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fo,
the reater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
of some dislocation and blunder spread throuh the ranks. How such a
consciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but it
certainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,
and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army been
alone without any allies, it miht perhaps have been a lon time before
this consciousness of mismanaement became a eneral conviction, but as
it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupid
ermans, and everyone was convinced that a danerous muddle had been
occasioned by the sausae eaters.

"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come up
aainst the French?"

"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firin if we had."

"They were in a hurry enouh to start us, and now here we stand in the
middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned
ermans' muddlin! What stupid devils!"

"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowdin up
behind. And now here we stand hunry."

"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blockin the
way," said an officer.

"Ah, those damned ermans! They don't know their own country!" said
another.

"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, ridin up.

"The Eihteenth."

"Then why are you here? You should have one on lon ao, now you won't
et there till evenin."

"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doin!"
said the officer and rode off.

Then a eneral rode past shoutin somethin anrily, not in Russian.

"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabberin no one can make out," said a
soldier, mimickin the eneral who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, the
scoundrels!"

"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't ot
halfway. Fine orders!" was bein repeated on different sides.

And the feelin of enery with which the troops had started bean to
turn into vexation and aner at the stupid arranements and at the
ermans.

The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry was
movin toward our left flank, the hiher command found that our center
was too far separated from our riht flank and the cavalry were all
ordered to turn back to the riht. Several thousand cavalry crossed in
front of the infantry, who had to wait.

At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian uide and a
Russian eneral. The eneral shouted a demand that the cavalry should be
halted, the Austrian arued that not he, but the hiher command, was to
blame. The troops meanwhile stood rowin listless and dispirited. After
an hour's delay they at last moved on, descendin the hill. The fo that
was dispersin on the hill lay still more densely below, where they were
descendin. In front in the fo a shot was heard and then another, at
first irreularly at varyin intervals--trata... tat--and then more and
more reularly and rapidly, and the action at the oldbach Stream bean.

Not expectin to come on the enemy down by the stream, and havin
stumbled on him in the fo, hearin no encourain word from their
commanders, and with a consciousness of bein too late spreadin throuh
the ranks, and above all bein unable to see anythin in front or around
them in the thick fo, the Russians exchaned shots with the enemy
lazily and advanced and aain halted, receivin no timely orders from
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fo in those unknown
surroundins unable to find their own reiments. In this way the action
bean for the first, second, and third columns, which had one down into
the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the
Pratzen Heihts.

Below, where the fiht was beinnin, there was still thick fo; on the
hiher round it was clearin, but nothin could be seen of what was
oin on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,
six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one
knew till after eiht o'clock.

It was nine o'clock in the mornin. The fo lay unbroken like a sea down
below, but hiher up at the villae of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood
with his marshals around him, it was quite liht. Above him was a clear
blue sky, and the sun's vast orb quivered like a hue hollow, crimson
float on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French army,
and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side of
the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which we
intended to take up our position and bein the action, but were on this
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
distinuish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak
which he had worn on his Italian campain, sat on his small ray Arab
horse a little in front of his marshals. He azed silently at the hills
which seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russian
troops were movin in the distance, and he listened to the sounds of
firin in the valley. Not a sinle muscle of his face--which in those
days was still thin--moved. His leamin eyes were fixed intently on one
spot. His predictions were bein justified. Part of the Russian force
had already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and
part were leavin these Pratzen Heihts which he intended to attack and
rearded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in a
hollow between two hills near the villae of Pratzen, the Russian
columns, their bayonets litterin, were movin continuously in one
direction toward the valley and disappearin one after another into the
mist. From information he had received the evenin before, from the
sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts durin the niht, by
the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from all
indications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far away
in front of them, and that the columns movin near Pratzen constituted
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
bein the enaement.

Today was a reat day for him--the anniversary of his coronation. Before
dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, viorous, and in ood
spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy
mood in which everythin seems possible and everythin succeeds. He sat
motionless, lookin at the heihts visible above the mist, and his cold
face wore that special look of confident, self-complacent happiness that
one sees on the face of a boy happily in love. The marshals stood behind
him not venturin to distract his attention. He looked now at the
Pratzen Heihts, now at the sun floatin up out of the mist.

When the sun had entirely emered from the fo, and fields and mist were
alow with dazzlin liht--as if he had only awaited this to bein the
action--he drew the love from his shapely white hand, made a sin with
it to the marshals, and ordered the action to bein. The marshals,
accompanied by adjutants, alloped off in different directions, and a
few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
toward those Pratzen Heihts which were bein more and more denuded by
Russian troops movin down the valley to their left.




CHAPTER XV

At eiht o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
column, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place of
Przebyszewski's and Laneron's columns which had already one down into
the valley. He reeted the men of the foremost reiment and ave them
the order to march, thereby indicatin that he intended to lead that
column himself. When he had reached the villae of Pratzen he halted.
Prince Andrew was behind, amon the immense number formin the
commander-in-chief's suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement
and irritation, thouh controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of
a lon-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day of
his Toulon, or his bride of Arcola. How it would come about he did not
know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position of
our troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone in
our army. His own strateic plan, which obviously could not now be
carried out, was forotten. Now, enterin into Weyrother's plan, Prince
Andrew considered possible continencies and formed new projects such as
miht call for his rapidity of perception and decision.

To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forces
could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thouht the fiht would
concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there," thouht
he, "I shall be sent with a briade or division, and there, standard in
hand, I shall o forward and break whatever is in front of me."

He could not look calmly at the standards of the passin battalions.
Seein them he kept thinkin, "That may be the very standard with which
I shall lead the army."

In the mornin all that was left of the niht mist on the heihts was a
hoar frost now turnin to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
milk-white sea. Nothin was visible in the valley to the left into which
our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firin.
Above the heihts was the dark clear sky, and to the riht the vast orb
of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,
some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably
was, for somethin could be descried. On the riht the uards were
enterin the misty reion with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and
then a leam of bayonets; to the left beyond the villae similar masses
of cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front and
behind moved infantry. The commander-in-chief was standin at the end of
the villae lettin the troops pass by him. That mornin Kutuzov seemed
worn and irritable. The infantry passin before him came to a halt
without any command bein iven, apparently obstructed by somethin in
front.

"Do order them to form into battalion columns and o round the villae!"
he said anrily to a eneral who had ridden up. "Don't you understand,
your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile throuh narrow
villae streets when we are marchin aainst the enemy?"

"I intended to re-form them beyond the villae, your excellency,"
answered the eneral.

Kutuzov lauhed bitterly.

"You'll make a fine thin of it, deployin in siht of the enemy! Very
fine!"

"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. Accordin to the
dispositions..."

"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?...
Kindly do as you are ordered."

"Yes, sir."

"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man is
as surly as a do."

An Austrian officer in a white uniform with reen plumes in his hat
alloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourth
column advanced into action.

Kutuzov turned round without answerin and his eye happened to fall upon
Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seein him, Kutuzov's malevolent and
caustic expression softened, as if admittin that what was bein done
was not his adjutant's fault, and still not answerin the Austrian
adjutant, he addressed Bolkonski.

"o, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed the
villae. Tell it to stop and await my orders."

Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.

"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What are
they doin? What are they doin?" he murmured to himself, still not
replyin to the Austrian.

Prince Andrew alloped off to execute the order.

Overtakin the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped the
third division and convinced himself that there really were no
sharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of the
reiment was much surprised at the commander-in-chief's order to throw
out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troops
in front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.
There was really nothin to be seen in front except a barren descent
hidden by dense mist. Havin iven orders in the commander-in-chief's
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew alloped back. Kutuzov
still in the same place, his stout body restin heavily in the saddle
with the lassitude of ae, sat yawnin wearily with closed eyes. The
troops were no loner movin, but stood with the butts of their muskets
on the round.

"All riht, all riht!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to a
eneral who, watch in hand, was sayin it was time they started as all
the left-flank columns had already descended.

"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a
yawn. "Plenty of time," he repeated.

Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of reiments
salutin, and this sound rapidly came nearer alon the whole extended
line of the advancin Russian columns. Evidently the person they were
reetin was ridin quickly. When the soldiers of the reiment in front
of which Kutuzov was standin bean to shout, he rode a little to one
side and looked round with a frown. Alon the road from Pratzen alloped
what looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of them
rode side by side in front, at full allop. One in a black uniform with
white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other who
was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors
followed by their suites. Kutuzov, affectin the manners of an old
soldier at the front, ave the command "Attention!" and rode up to the
Emperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were suddenly
transformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys without
reasonin. With an affectation of respect which evidently struck
Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.

This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the youn and happy face
of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.
After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field of
Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but there
was still the same bewitchin combination of majesty and mildness in his
fine ray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varyin
expression and the same prevalent appearance of oodhearted innocent
youth.

At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemed
brihter and more eneretic. He was slihtly flushed after allopin two
miles, and reinin in his horse he sihed restfully and looked round at
the faces of his suite, youn and animated as his own. Czartoryski,
Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Stroonov, and the others, all richly
dressed ay youn men on splendid, well-roomed, fresh, only slihtly
heated horses, exchanin remarks and smilin, had stopped behind the
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, lon faced youn man, sat very
erect on his handsome black horse, lookin about him in a leisurely and
preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked
some question--"Most likely he is askin at what o'clock they started,"
thouht Prince Andrew, watchin his old acquaintance with a smile he
could not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn. In the
Emperors' suite were the picked youn orderly officers of the uard and
line reiments, Russian and Austrian. Amon them were rooms leadin the
Tsar's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.

As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters a
stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, enery, and confidence of
success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the allopin advent of
all these brilliant youn men.

"Why aren't you beinnin, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor
Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, lancin courteously at the same time at
the Emperor Francis.

"I am waitin, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bendin forward
respectfully.

The Emperor, frownin slihtly, bent his ear forward as if he had not
quite heard.

"Waitin, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted that
Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waitin.")
"Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."

The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrued his
rather round shoulders and lanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as
if complainin of Kutuzov.

"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Field where
a parade does not bein till all the troops are assembled," said the
Tsar with another lance at the Emperor Francis, as if invitin him if
not to join in at least to listen to what he was sayin. But the Emperor
Francis continued to look about him and did not listen.

"That is just why I do not bein, sire," said Kutuzov in a resoundin
voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not bein heard, and
aain somethin in his face twitched--"That is just why I do not bein,
sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Empress' Field," said
clearly and distinctly.

In the Emperor's suite all exchaned rapid looks that expressed
dissatisfaction and reproach. "Old thouh he may be, he should not, he
certainly should not, speak like that," their lances seemed to say.

The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waitin to
hear whether he would say anythin more. But Kutuzov, with respectfully
bowed head, seemed also to be waitin. The silence lasted for about a
minute.

"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, liftin his
head and aain assumin his former tone of a dull, unreasonin, but
submissive eneral.

He touched his horse and havin called Miloradovich, the commander of
the column, ave him the order to advance.

The troops aain bean to move, and two battalions of the Novorod and
one of the Apsheron reiment went forward past the Emperor.

As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,
without his reatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormous
tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners front
and back, alloped strenuously forward, and with a dashin salute reined
in his horse before the Emperor.

"od be with you, eneral!" said the Emperor.

"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire," *
he answered aily, raisin nevertheless ironic smiles amon the
entlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.


* "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everythin it is possible to do, Sire."

Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a little
behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence,
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
pace.

"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheery
voice, obviously so elated by the sound of firin, by the prospect of
battle, and by the siht of the allant Apsherons, his comrades in
Suvorov's time, now passin so allantly before the Emperors, that he
forot the sovereins' presence. "Lads, it's not the first villae
you've had to take," cried he.

"lad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.

The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had
carried the soverein at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the
field of Austerlitz, endurin the heedless blows of his left foot and
prickin its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on the
Empress' Field, not understandin the sinificance of the firin, nor of
the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that was
bein said, thouht, and felt that day by its rider.

The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
remark to him, pointin to the allant Apsherons.




CHAPTER XVI

Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walkin pace behind the
carabineers.

When he had one less than half a mile in the rear of the column he
stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been an
inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops were
marchin alon both.

The fo had beun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visible
about a mile and a half off on the opposite heihts. Down below, on the
left, the firin became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and was
speakin to an Austrian eneral. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
lookin at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field lass.

"Look, look!" said this adjutant, lookin not at the troops in the
distance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"

The two enerals and the adjutant took hold of the field lass, tryin
to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their faces
suddenly chaned to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a mile
and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in
front of us.

"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how is
that?" said different voices.

With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the riht, not more
than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standin, a dense French
column comin up to meet the Apsherons.

"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come," thouht
Prince Andrew, and strikin his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.

"The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But at that
very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firin was heard quite
close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince
Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command,
everyone bean to run.

Confused and ever-increasin crowds were runnin back to where five
minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to be
carried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to lose touch
with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to rasp what was
happenin in front of him. Nesvitski with an anry face, red and unlike
himself, was shoutin to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once he
would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzov remained in the same place
and without answerin drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowin from
his cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him.

"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the tremblin of his
lower jaw.

"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressin the
handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointin to the fleein soldiers.
"Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizin that
it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the riht.

A fresh wave of the flyin mob cauht him and bore him back with it.

The troops were runnin in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
them it was difficult to et out aain. One was shoutin, "et on! Why
are you hinderin us?" Another in the same place turned round and fired
in the air; a third was strikin the horse Kutuzov himself rode. Havin
by a reat effort ot away to the left from that flood of men, Kutuzov,
with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a sound of
artillery fire near by. Havin forced his way out of the crowd of
fuitives, Prince Andrew, tryin to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slope
of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firin and
Frenchmen runnin toward it. Hiher up stood some Russian infantry,
neither movin forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
fleein crowd. A mounted eneral separated himself from the infantry and
approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They were all
pale and exchaned looks in silence.

"Stop those wretches!" asped Kutuzov to the reimental commander,
pointin to the flyin soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punish
him for those words, bullets flew hissin across the reiment and across
Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.

The French had attacked the battery and, seein Kutuzov, were firin at
him. After this volley the reimental commander clutched at his le;
several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holdin the fla
let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but cauht on the
muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firin without
orders.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" roaned Kutuzov despairinly and looked around....
"Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice tremblin from a consciousness of
the feebleness of ae, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointin to the
disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"

But before he had finished speakin, Prince Andrew, feelin tears of
shame and aner chokin him, had already leapt from his horse and run to
the standard.

"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercin as a child's.

"Here it is!" thouht he, seizin the staff of the standard and hearin
with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Several
soldiers fell.

"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavy
standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion
would follow him.

And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then
another and soon the whole battalion ran forward shoutin "Hurrah!" and
overtook him. A sereant of the battalion ran up and took the fla that
was swayin from its weiht in Prince Andrew's hands, but he was
immediately killed. Prince Andrew aain seized the standard and,
drain it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw our
artillerymen, some of whom were fihtin, while others, havin abandoned
their uns, were runnin toward him. He also saw French infantry
soldiers who were seizin the artillery horses and turnin the uns
round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty paces
of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasinly and
to riht and left of him soldiers continually roaned and dropped. But
he did not look at them: he looked only at what was oin on in front of
him--at the battery. He now saw clearly the fiure of a red-haired
unner with his shako knocked awry, pullin one end of a mop while a
French soldier tued at the other. He could distinctly see the
distrauht yet anry expression on the faces of these two men, who
evidently did not realize what they were doin.

"What are they about?" thouht Prince Andrew as he azed at them. "Why
doesn't the red-haired unner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the
Frenchman stab him? He will not et away before the Frenchman remembers
his bayonet and stabs him...."

And really another French soldier, trailin his musket, ran up to the
strulin men, and the fate of the red-haired unner, who had
triumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,
was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It
seemed to him as thouh one of the soldiers near him hit him on the head
with the full swin of a bludeon. It hurt a little, but the worst of it
was that the pain distracted him and prevented his seein what he had
been lookin at.

"What's this? Am I fallin? My les are ivin way," thouht he, and
fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hopin to see how the strule of
the Frenchmen with the unners ended, whether the red-haired unner had
been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved.
But he saw nothin. Above him there was now nothin but the sky--the
lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with ray clouds
lidin slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not at all
as I ran," thouht Prince Andrew--"not as we ran, shoutin and fihtin,
not at all as the unner and the Frenchman with frihtened and anry
faces struled for the mop: how differently do those clouds lide
across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty sky
before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity,
all falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothin, nothin, but
that. But even it does not exist, there is nothin but quiet and peace.
Thank od!..."




CHAPTER XVII

On our riht flank commanded by Baration, at nine o'clock the battle
had not yet beun. Not wishin to aree to Dolorukov's demand to
commence the action, and wishin to avert responsibility from himself,
Prince Baration proposed to Dolorukov to send to inquire of the
commander-in-chief. Baration knew that as the distance between the two
flanks was more than six miles, even if the messener were not killed
(which he very likely would be), and found the commander-in-chief (which
would be very difficult), he would not be able to et back before
evenin.

Baration cast his lare, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,
and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was the
first to catch his eye. He sent him.

"And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander-in-chief,
your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.

"You can ive the messae to His Majesty," said Dolorukov, hurriedly
interruptin Baration.

On bein relieved from picket duty Rostov had manaed to et a few
hours' sleep before mornin and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, with
elasticity of movement, faith in his ood fortune, and enerally in that
state of mind which makes everythin seem possible, pleasant, and easy.

All his wishes were bein fulfilled that mornin: there was to be a
eneral enaement in which he was takin part, more than that, he was
orderly to the bravest eneral, and still more, he was oin with a
messae to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the soverein himself. The mornin
was briht, he had a ood horse under him, and his heart was full of joy
and happiness. On receivin the order he ave his horse the rein and
alloped alon the line. At first he rode alon the line of Baration's
troops, which had not yet advanced into action but were standin
motionless; then he came to the reion occupied by Uvarov's cavalry and
here he noticed a stir and sins of preparation for battle; havin
passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and
musketry ahead of him. The firin rew louder and louder.

In the fresh mornin air were now heard, not two or three musket shots
at irreular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,
but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill before
Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
several of them were not separated from one another but mered into a
eneral roar.

He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another
down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rollin, spreadin, and
minlin with one another. He could also, by the leam of bayonets
visible throuh the smoke, make out movin masses of infantry and narrow
lines of artillery with reen caissons.

Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was oin
on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make
out anythin of what was happenin: there in the smoke men of some sort
were movin about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why,
whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out. These sihts
and sounds had no depressin or intimidatin effect on him; on the
contrary, they stimulated his enery and determination.

"o on! o on! ive it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds, and
aain proceeded to allop alon the line, penetratin farther and
farther into the reion where the army was already in action.

"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thouht
Rostov.

After passin some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the
line (the uards) was already in action.

"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thouht.

He was ridin almost alon the front line. A handful of men came
allopin toward him. They were our uhlans who with disordered ranks
were returnin from the attack. Rostov ot out of their way,
involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleedin, and alloped on.

"That is no business of mine," he thouht. He had not ridden many
hundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the whole
width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
uniforms, mounted on black horses, trottin straiht toward him and
across his path. Rostov put his horse to full allop to et out of the
way of these men, and he would have ot clear had they continued at the
same speed, but they kept increasin their pace, so that some of the
horses were already allopin. Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and
the jinle of their weapons and saw their horses, their fiures, and
even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse uards,
advancin to attack the French cavalry that was comin to meet them.

The Horse uards were allopin, but still holdin in their horses.
Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command: "Chare!"
shouted by an officer who was urin his thorouhbred to full speed.
Rostov, fearin to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French,
alloped alon the front as hard as his horse could o, but still was
not in time to avoid them.

The last of the Horse uards, a hue pockmarked fellow, frowned anrily
on seein Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide. This
uardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over
(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these iantic men
and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before
the eyes of the uardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen hands
hih, shied, throwin back its ears; but the pockmarked uardsman drove
his hue spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishin its tail and
extendin its neck, alloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse uards
passed Rostov before he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and lookin back saw
that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some forein cavalry with
red epaulets, probably French. He could see nothin more, for
immediately afterwards cannon bean firin from somewhere and smoke
enveloped everythin.

At that moment, as the Horse uards, havin passed him, disappeared in
the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to allop after them or to o where
he was sent. This was the brilliant chare of the Horse uards that
amazed the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that of
all that mass of hue and handsome men, of all those brilliant, rich
youths, officers and cadets, who had alloped past him on their
thousand-ruble horses, only eihteen were left after the chare.

"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see
the Emperor immediately!" thouht Rostov and alloped on.

When he came level with the Foot uards he noticed that about them and
around them cannon balls were flyin, of which he was aware not so much
because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on the
soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the
officers.

Passin behind one of the lines of a reiment of Foot uards he heard a
voice callin him by name.

"Rostov!"

"What?" he answered, not reconizin Boris.

"I say, we've been in the front line! Our reiment attacked!" said Boris
with the happy smile seen on the faces of youn men who have been under
fire for the first time.

Rostov stopped.

"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it o?"

"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, rowin talkative. "Can
you imaine it?" and he bean describin how the uards, havin taken up
their position and seein troops before them, thouht they were
Austrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls dischared
by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had
unexpectedly to o into action. Rostov without hearin Boris to the end
spurred his horse.

"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.

"With a messae to His Majesty."

"There he is!" said Boris, thinkin Rostov had said "His Hihness," and
pointin to the rand Duke who with his hih shoulders and frownin
brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse
uards' jacket, shoutin somethin to a pale, white uniformed Austrian
officer.

"But that's the rand Duke, and I want the commander-in-chief or the
Emperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.

"Count! Count!" shouted Ber who ran up from the other side as eaer as
Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my riht hand" (and he showed his
bleedin hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at the
front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family--the von
Bers--have been knihts!"

He said somethin more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode
away.

Havin passed the uards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoid
aain ettin in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse
uards chared, followed the line of reserves, oin far round the place
where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he
heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,
where he could never have expected the enemy to be.

"What can it be?" he thouht. "The enemy in the rear of our army?
Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself
and for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may," he
reflected, "there is no ridin round it now. I must look for the
commander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish with
the rest."

The forebodin of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and
more confirmed the farther he rode into the reion behind the villae of
Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.

"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firin at? Who is firin?"
Rostov kept askin as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers
runnin in confused crowds across his path.

"The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he was
told in Russian, erman, and Czech by the crowd of fuitives who
understood what was happenin as little as he did.

"Kill the ermans!" shouted one.

"May the devil take them--the traitors!"

"Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a erman.


* "Han these Russians!"

Several wounded men passed alon the road, and words of abuse, screams,
and roans minled in a eneral hubbub, then the firin died down.
Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firin
at one another.

"My od! What does it all mean?" thouht he. "And here, where at any
moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a handful
of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Only
to et past them quicker, quicker!"

The idea of defeat and fliht could not enter Rostov's head. Thouh he
saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heihts just where he
had been ordered to look for the commander-in-chief, he could not, did
not wish to, believe that.




CHAPTER XVIII

Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the
villae of Pratzen. But neither they nor a sinle commandin officer
were there, only disoranized crowds of troops of various kinds. He
ured on his already weary horse to et quickly past these crowds, but
the farther he went the more disoranized they were. The hihroad on
which he had come out was throned with caleches, carriaes of all
sorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and
some not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the
dismal influence of cannon balls flyin from the French batteries
stationed on the Pratzen Heihts.

"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept askin everyone he
could stop, but ot no answer from anyone.

At last seizin a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.

"Eh, brother! They've all bolted lon ao!" said the soldier, lauhin
for some reason and shakin himself free.

Havin left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped the
horse of a batman or room of some important personae and bean to
question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a
carriae at full speed about an hour before alon that very road and
that he was danerously wounded.

"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."

"I saw him myself," replied the man with a self-confident smile of
derision. "I ouht to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seen
him in Petersbur. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in the
carriae as pale as anythin. How they made the four black horses fly!
racious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horses
and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"

Rostov let o of the horse and was about to ride on, when a wounded
officer passin by addressed him:

"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander-in-chief? He was killed
by a cannon ball--struck in the breast before our reiment."

"Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him.

"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.

"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name--well, never mind... there are not
many left alive. o that way, to that villae, all the commanders are
there," said the officer, pointin to the villae of Hosjeradek, and he
walked on.

Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowin why or to whom he was now
oin. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to
doubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in which
he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to say
to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?

"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" a
soldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"

"Oh, what are you talkin about?" said another. "Where is he to o? That
way is nearer."

Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said he
would be killed.

"It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to save
myself?" he thouht. He rode on to the reion where the reatest number
of men had perished in fleein from Pratzen. The French had not yet
occupied that reion, and the Russians--the uninjured and slihtly
wounded--had left it lon ao. All about the field, like heaps of manure
on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each
couple of acres. The wounded crept toether in twos and threes and one
could hear their distressin screams and roans, sometimes feined--or
so it seemed to Rostov. He put his horse to a trot to avoid seein all
these sufferin men, and he felt afraid--afraid not for his life, but
for the courae he needed and which he knew would not stand the siht of
these unfortunates.

The French, who had ceased firin at this field strewn with dead and
wounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seein an adjutant
ridin over it trained a un on him and fired several shots. The
sensation of those terrible whistlin sounds and of the corpses around
him mered in Rostov's mind into a sinle feelin of terror and pity for
himself. He remembered his mother's last letter. "What would she feel,"
thouht he, "if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed
at me?"

In the villae of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retirin from the
field of battle, who thouh still in some confusion were less
disordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle was
lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor or
Kutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was
correct, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had
spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriae had really alloped from
the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count
Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the
Emperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from
headquarters behind the villae to the left, and thither Rostov rode,
not hopin to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he had
ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he
saw, near a kitchen arden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback
facin the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to
Rostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied he
had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs,
and ivin it the rein leaped lihtly over. Only a little earth crumbled
from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turnin the horse sharply,
he aain jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman with
the white plumes, evidently suestin that he should do the same. The
rider, whose fiure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted
his attention, made a esture of refusal with his head and hand and by
that esture Rostov instantly reconized his lamented and adored
monarch.

"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thouht
Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the
beloved features that were so deeply enraved on his memory. The Emperor
was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, the
mildness of his features, was all the reater. Rostov was happy in the
assurance that the rumors about the Emperor bein wounded were false. He
was happy to be seein him. He knew that he miht and even ouht to o
straiht to him and ive the messae Dolorukov had ordered him to
deliver.

But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the
thouhts he has dreamed of for nihts, but looks around for help or a
chance of delay and fliht when the loned-for moment comes and he is
alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he had loned
for more than anythin else in the world, did not know how to approach
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.

"What! It is as if I were lad of a chance to take advantae of his
bein alone and despondent! A strane face may seem unpleasant or
painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to him
now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere siht of
him?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that
he had composed in his imaination could he now recall. Those speeches
were intended for quite other conditions, they were for the most part to
be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, enerally when he was
dyin of wounds and the soverein had thanked him for heroic deeds, and
while dyin he expressed the love his actions had proved.

"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the riht
flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost? No,
certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on his
reflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receivin an unkind
look or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully and with
a heart full despair he rode away, continually lookin back at the Tsar,
who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.

While Rostov was thus aruin with himself and ridin sadly away,
Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seein the
Emperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted him
to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishin to rest and feelin
unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke lon
and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weepin,
covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.

"And I miht have been in his place!" thouht Rostov, and hardly
restrainin his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utter
despair, not knowin where to or why he was now ridin.

His despair was all the reater from feelin that his own weakness was
the cause of his rief.

He miht... not only miht but should, have one up to the soverein. It
was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not
made use of it.... "What have I done?" thouht he. And he turned round
and alloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but there
was no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriaes were
passin by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff were
not far off, in the villae the vehicles were oin to. Rostov followed
them. In front of him walked Kutuzov's room leadin horses in
horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old, bandy-
leed domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.

"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the room.

"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.

"o, Tit! Thresh a bit!"

"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spittin anrily. Some time passed in
silence, and then the same joke was repeated.

Before five in the evenin the battle had been lost at all points. More
than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.

Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns
after losin half their men were retreatin in disorderly confused
masses.

The remains of Laneron's and Dokhturov's minled forces were crowdin
around the dams and banks of the ponds near the villae of Auesd.

After five o'clock it was only at the Auesd Dam that a hot cannonade
(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
batteries raned on the slopes of the Pratzen Heihts, directed at our
retreatin forces.

In the rearuard, Dokhturov and others rallyin some battalions kept up
a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuin our troops. It
was rowin dusk. On the narrow Auesd Dam where for so many years the
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully
anlin, while his randson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the
flounderin silvery fish in the waterin can, on that dam over which for
so many years Moravians in shay caps and blue jackets had peacefully
driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty
with flour whitenin their carts--on that narrow dam amid the waons and
the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the waon wheels, men
disfiured by fear of death now crowded toether, crushin one another,
dyin, steppin over the dyin and killin one another, only to move on
a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.

Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressin the air around, or a
shell burst in the midst of that dense thron, killin some and
splashin with blood those near them.

Dolokhov--now an officer--wounded in the arm, and on foot, with the
reimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,
represented all that was left of that whole reiment. Impelled by the
crowd, they had ot weded in at the approach to the dam and, jammed in
on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a
cannon and the crowd were drain it out. A cannon ball killed someone
behind them, another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood. The
crowd, pushin forward desperately, squeezed toether, moved a few
steps, and aain stopped.

"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another
two minutes and it is certain death," thouht each one.

Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the ede of
the dam, throwin two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slippery
ice that covered the millpool.

"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumpin over the ice which creaked under
him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the un. "It bears!..."

The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that it
would ive way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon even
under his weiht alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the bank,
hesitatin to step onto the ice. The eneral on horseback at the
entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address
Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that
everyone ducked. It flopped into somethin moist, and the eneral fell
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody ave him a look or thouht of
raisin him.

"et onto the ice, over the ice! o on! Turn! Don't you hear? o on!"
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the
eneral, the men themselves not knowin what, or why, they were
shoutin.

One of the hindmost uns that was oin onto the dam turned off onto the
ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam bean runnin onto the frozen pond.
The ice ave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one le slipped
into the water. He tried to riht himself but fell in up to his waist.
The nearest soldiers shrank back, the un driver stopped his horse, but
from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? o
on! o on!" And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiers
near the un waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and
move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under
those on foot, collapsed in a reat mass, and some forty men who were on
it dashed, some forward and some back, drownin one another.

Still the cannon balls continued reularly to whistle and flop onto the
ice and into the water and oftenest of all amon the crowd that covered
the dam, the pond, and the bank.




CHAPTER XIX

On the Pratzen Heihts, where he had fallen with the flastaff in his
hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleedin profusely and unconsciously
utterin a entle, piteous, and childlike moan.

Toward evenin he ceased moanin and became quite still. He did not know
how lon his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he aain felt that he was
alive and sufferin from a burnin, laceratin pain in his head.

"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw
today?" was his first thouht. "And I did not know this sufferin
either," he thouht. "Yes, I did not know anythin, anythin at all till
now. But where am I?"

He listened and heard the sound of approachin horses, and voices
speakin French. He opened his eyes. Above him aain was the same lofty
sky with clouds that had risen and were floatin still hiher, and
between them leamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did not
see those who, judin by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden up
and stopped near him.

It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte ridin over
the battlefield had iven final orders to strenthen the batteries
firin at the Auesd Dam and was lookin at the killed and wounded left
on the field.

"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, lookin at a dead Russian renadier, who,
with his face buried in the round and a blackened nape, lay on his
stomach with an already stiffened arm flun wide.

"The ammunition for the uns in position is exhausted, Your Majesty,"
said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firin at
Auesd.

"Have some brouht from the reserve," said Napoleon, and havin one on
a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back with
the flastaff that had been dropped beside him. (The fla had already
been taken by the French as a trophy.)

"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he azed at Bolkonski.

Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he
heard the words as he miht have heard the buzzin of a fly. Not only
did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at once
forot them. His head was burnin, he felt himself bleedin to death,
and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlastin sky. He knew it
was Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a
small, insinificant creature compared with what was passin now between
himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flyin over it. At
that moment it meant nothin to him who miht be standin over him, or
what was said of him; he was only lad that people were standin near
him and only wished that they would help him and brin him back to life,
which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to
understand it so differently. He collected all his strenth, to stir and
utter a sound. He feebly moved his le and uttered a weak, sickly roan
which aroused his own pity.

"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this youn man up and carry him
to the dressin station."

Havin said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in
hand, rode up smilin to the Emperor to conratulate him on the victory.

Prince Andrew remembered nothin more: he lost consciousness from the
terrible pain of bein lifted onto the stretcher, the joltin while
bein moved, and the probin of his wound at the dressin station. He
did not reain consciousness till late in the day, when with other
wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.
Durin this transfer he felt a little stroner and was able to look
about him and even speak.

The first words he heard on comin to his senses were those of a French
convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Emperor will
pass here immediately; it will please him to see these entlemen
prisoners."

"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that
he is probably tired of them," said another officer.

"All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor
Alexander's uards," said the first one, indicatin a Russian officer in
the white uniform of the Horse uards.

Bolkonski reconized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersbur
society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer of
the Horse uards.

Bonaparte, havin come up at a allop, stopped his horse.

"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seein the prisoners.

They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.

"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's reiment of Horse
uards?" asked Napoleon.

"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.

"Your reiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.

"The praise of a reat commander is a soldier's hihest reward," said
Repnin.

"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that youn man
beside you?"

Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.

After lookin at him Napoleon smiled.

"He's very youn to come to meddle with us."

"Youth is no hindrance to courae," muttered Sukhtelen in a failin
voice.

"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Youn man, you will o far!"

Prince Andrew, who had also been brouht forward before the Emperor's
eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seein him on the battlefield
and, addressin him, aain used the epithet "youn man" that was
connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.

"Well, and you, youn man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"

Thouh five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few
words to the soldiers who were carryin him, now with his eyes fixed
straiht on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insinificant at that moment
seemed to him all the interests that enrossed Napoleon, so mean did his
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear, compared
to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen and
understood, that he could not answer him.

Everythin seemed so futile and insinificant in comparison with the
stern and solemn train of thouht that weakness from loss of blood,
sufferin, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Lookin into
Napoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thouht of the insinificance of
reatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and
the still reater unimportance of death, the meanin of which no one
alive could understand or explain.

The Emperor without waitin for an answer turned away and said to one of
the officers as he went: "Have these entlemen attended to and taken to
my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,
Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and alloped away.

His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.

The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the
little old icon Princess Mary had hun round her brother's neck, but
seein the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to
return the holy imae.

Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the
little icon with its thin old chain suddenly appeared upon his chest
outside his uniform.

"It would be ood," thouht Prince Andrew, lancin at the icon his
sister had hun round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it
would be ood if everythin were as clear and simple as it seems to
Mary. How ood it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,
and what to expect after it beyond the rave! How happy and calm I
should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But to whom
should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,
which I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express in
words--the reat All or Nothin-" said he to himself, "or to that od
who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothin certain,
nothin at all except the unimportance of everythin I understand, and
the reatness of somethin incomprehensible but all-important."

The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he aain felt unendurable pain;
his feverishness increased and he rew delirious. Visions of his father,
wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the niht
before the battle, the fiure of the insinificant little Napoleon, and
above all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious
fancies.

The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented
itself to him. He was already enjoyin that happiness when that little
Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizin look of
shortsihted deliht at the misery of others, and doubts and torments
had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward mornin all
these dreams melted and mered into the chaos and darkness of
unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor,
Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence.

"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover."

And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care of
the inhabitants of the district.

BOOK FOUR: 1806




CHAPTER I

Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave. Denisov
was oin home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him
as far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meetin a comrade at the
last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottles
of wine with him and, despite the joltin ruts across the snow-covered
road, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay at the bottom
of the sleih beside Rostov, who rew more and more impatient the nearer
they ot to Moscow.

"How much loner? How much loner? Oh, these insufferable streets,
shops, bakers' sinboards, street lamps, and sleihs!" thouht Rostov,
when their leave permits had been passed at the town ate and they had
entered Moscow.

"Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leanin forward with his
whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the
sleih.

Denisov ave no answer.

"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has his
stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And here's
the little shop where we used to buy inerbread! Can't you hurry up?
Now then!"

"Which house is it?" asked the driver.

"Why, that one, riht at the end, the bi one. Don't you see? That's our
house," said Rostov. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We're
almost there!"

Denisov raised his head, couhed, and made no answer.

"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lihts are in our
house, aren't they?"

"Yes, sir, and there's a liht in your father's study."

"Then they've not one to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now, don't
foret to put out my new coat," added Rostov, finerin his new
mustache. "Now then, et on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake up,
Vaska!" he went on, turnin to Denisov, whose head was aain noddin.
"Come, et on! You shall have three rubles for vodka--et on!" Rostov
shouted, when the sleih was only three houses from his door. It seemed
to him the horses were not movin at all. At last the sleih bore to the
riht, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar
cornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post by the
side of the pavement. He spran out before the sleih stopped, and ran
into the hall. The house stood cold and silent, as if quite reardless
of who had come to it. There was no one in the hall. "Oh od! Is
everyone all riht?" he thouht, stoppin for a moment with a sinkin
heart, and then immediately startin to run alon the hall and up the
warped steps of the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle,
which always anered the countess when it was not properly cleaned,
turned as loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the
anteroom.

Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was so
stron that he could lift the back of the carriae from behind, sat
plaitin slippers out of cloth selvedes. He looked up at the openin
door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly chaned to one
of delihted amazement.

"racious heavens! The youn count!" he cried, reconizin his youn
master. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, tremblin with
excitement, rushed toward the drawin-room door, probably in order to
announce him, but, chanin his mind, came back and stooped to kiss the
youn man's shoulder.

"All well?" asked Rostov, drawin away his arm.

"Yes, od be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have a
look at you, your excellency."

"Is everythin quite all riht?"

"The Lord be thanked, yes!"

Rostov, who had completely forotten Denisov, not wishin anyone to
forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe throuh the
lare dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old card
tables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone had
already seen the youn master, and, before he had reached the drawin
room, somethin flew out from a side door like a tornado and bean
huin and kissin him. Another and yet another creature of the same
kind spran from a second door and a third; more huin, more kissin,
more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinuish which was
Papa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted, talked, and
kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticed
that.

"And I did not know... Nicholas... My darlin!..."

"Here he is... our own... Kolya, * dear fellow... How he has chaned!...
Where are the candles?... Tea!..."


* Nicholas.

"And me, kiss me!"

"Dearest... and me!"

Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count were
all huin him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room,
exclaimin and oh-in and ah-in.

Petya, clinin to his les, kept shoutin, "And me too!"

Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face
with kisses, holdin him tiht by the skirt of his coat, spran away and
pranced up and down in one place like a oat and shrieked piercinly.

All around were lovin eyes listenin with tears of joy, and all around
were lips seekin a kiss.

Sonya too, all rosy red, clun to his arm and, radiant with bliss,
looked eaerly toward his eyes, waitin for the look for which she
loned. Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially at
this moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She azed at him, not takin
her eyes off him, and smilin and holdin her breath. He ave her a
rateful look, but was still expectant and lookin for someone. The old
countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.

Yet it was she, dressed in a new own which he did not know, made since
he had left. All the others let him o, and he ran to her. When they
met, she fell on his breast, sobbin. She could not lift her face, but
only pressed it to the cold braidin of his hussar's jacket. Denisov,
who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped
his eyes at the siht.

"Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducin himself to the
count, who was lookin inquirinly at him.

"You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissin and
embracin Denisov. "Nicholas wrote us... Natasha, Vera, look! Here is
Denisov!"

The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shay fiure of Denisov.

"Darlin Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,
sprinin to him, puttin her arms round him, and kissin him. This
escapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smiled
and, takin Natasha's hand, kissed it.

Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostovs all
athered round Nicholas in the sittin room.

The old countess, not lettin o of his hand and kissin it every
moment, sat beside him: the rest, crowdin round him, watched every
movement, word, or look of his, never takin their blissfully adorin
eyes off him. His brother and sisters struled for the places nearest
to him and disputed with one another who should brin him his tea,
handkerchief, and pipe.

Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first moment
of meetin had been so beatific that his present joy seemed
insufficient, and he kept expectin somethin more, more and yet more.

Next mornin, after the fatiues of their journey, the travelers slept
till ten o'clock.

In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,
satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly
cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
were brinin in jus and basins, hot water for shavin, and their well-
brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco.

"Hallo, wiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice. "Wostov,
et up!"

Rostov, rubbin his eyes that seemed lued toether, raised his
disheveled head from the hot pillow.

"Why, is it late?"

"Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. A rustle of
starched petticoats and the whisperin and lauhter of irls' voices
came from the adjoinin room. The door was opened a crack and there was
a limpse of somethin blue, of ribbons, black hair, and merry faces. It
was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whether they were
ettin up.

"Nicholas! et up!" Natasha's voice was aain heard at the door.

"Directly!"

Meanwhile, Petya, havin found and seized the sabers in the outer room,
with the deliht boys feel at the siht of a military elder brother, and
forettin that it was unbecomin for the irls to see men undressed,
opened the bedroom door.

"Is this your saber?" he shouted.

The irls spran aside. Denisov hid his hairy les under the blanket,
lookin with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, havin let
Petya in, closed aain. A sound of lauhter came from behind it.

"Nicholas! Come out in your dressin own!" said Natasha's voice.

"Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said, addressin
the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.

Rostov hurriedly put somethin on his feet, drew on his dressin own,
and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just ettin
her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, was twirlin round and
was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They were
dressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, and
briht. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, takin her brother's arm, led him
into the sittin room, where they bean talkin. They hardly ave one
another time to ask questions and ive replies concernin a thousand
little matters which could not interest anyone but themselves. Natasha
lauhed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because what
they were sayin was amusin, but because she felt happy and was unable
to control her joy which expressed itself by lauhter.

"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everythin.

Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, that
childlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he left
home now for the first time after eihteen months aain brihtened his
soul and his face.

"No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you? I'm
awfully lad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I want to
know what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?"

"Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.

"Ah, yes! That's a whole lon story! How are you oin to speak to her--
thou or you?"

"As may happen," said Rostov.

"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time.
No, I'll tell you now. You know Sonya's my dearest friend. Such a friend
that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"

She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her lon,
slender, delicate arm, hih above the elbow on that part that is covered
even by a ball dress.

"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in the
fire and pressed it there!"

Sittin on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what used
to be his old schoolroom, and lookin into Natasha's wildly briht eyes,
Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meanin
for anyone else, but ave him some of the best joys of his life; and the
burnin of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him
senseless, he understood and was not surprised at it.

"Well, and is that all?" he asked.

"We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just
nonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it
for life, but I don't understand that, I foret quickly."

"Well, what then?"

"Well, she loves me and you like that."

Natasha suddenly flushed.

"Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are to
foret all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him be
free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?" asked
Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what she
was now sayin she had talked of before, with tears.

Rostov became thouhtful.

"I never o back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is so charmin
that only a fool would renounce such happiness."

"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over. We knew
you'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you say that--if you
consider yourself bound by your promise--it will seem as if she had not
meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marryin her because you
must, and that wouldn't do at all."

Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya had already
struck him by her beauty on the precedin day. Today, when he had cauht
a limpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charmin irl
of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubt
that for an instant). Why should he not love her now, and even marry
her, Rostov thouht, but just now there were so many other pleasures and
interests before him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he
thouht, "I must remain free."

"Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over later on.
Oh, how lad I am to have you!"

"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.

"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, lauhin. "I don't think about him
or anyone else, and I don't want anythin of the kind."

"Dear me! Then what are you up to now?"

"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have you
seen Duport?"

"No."

"Not seen Duport--the famous dancer? Well then, you won't understand.
That's what I'm up to."

Curvin her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back a
few steps, turned, cut a caper, brouht her little feet sharply
toether, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.

"See, I'm standin! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself on
her toes any loner. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never marry anyone,
but will be a dancer. Only don't tell anyone."

Rostov lauhed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, felt
envious and Natasha could not help joinin in.

"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeatin.

"Nice! And so you no loner wish to marry Boris?"

Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell him so
when I see him!"

"Dear me!" said Rostov.

"But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisov nice?"
she asked.

"Yes, indeed!"

"Oh, well then, ood-by: o and dress. Is he very terrible, Denisov?"

"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow."

"You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"

"Very."

"Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast toether."

And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet
dancer, but smilin as only happy irls of fifteen can smile. When
Rostov met Sonya in the drawin room, he reddened. He did not know how
to behave with her. The evenin before, in the first happy moment of
meetin, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not be
done; he felt that everybody, includin his mother and sisters, was
lookin inquirinly at him and watchin to see how he would behave with
her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you--Sonya.
But their eyes met and said thou, and exchaned tender kisses. Her looks
asked him to forive her for havin dared, by Natasha's intermediacy, to
remind him of his promise, and then thanked him for his love. His looks
thanked her for offerin him his freedom and told her that one way or
another he would never cease to love her, for that would be impossible.

"How strane it is," said Vera, selectin a moment when all were silent,
"that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like
straners."

Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most of
her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya,
Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who--dreadin this
love affair which miht hinder Nicholas from makin a brilliant match--
blushed like a irl.

Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawin room with pomaded
hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, lookin just as smart as he made
himself when oin into battle, and he was more amiable to the ladies
and entlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him.




CHAPTER II

On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was welcomed by
his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darlin
Nikolenka; by his relations as a charmin, attractive, and polite youn
man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a ood
dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.

The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enouh
that year, as all his estates had been remortaed, and so Nicholas,
acquirin a trotter of his own, very stylish ridin breeches of the
latest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the
latest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,
passed his time very aily. After a short period of adaptin himself to
the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be at
home aain. He felt that he had rown up and matured very much. His
despair at failin in a Scripture examination, his borrowin money from
avril to pay a sleih driver, his kissin Sonya on the sly--he now
recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind. Now
he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, and
wearin the Cross of St. eore, awarded to soldiers for bravery in
action, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racin
men was trainin a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on one
of the boulevards whom he visited of an evenin. He led the mazurka at
the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski,
visited the Enlish Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel of
forty to whom Denisov had introduced him.

His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, as
he did not see him and had no opportunity of seein him, he often spoke
about him and about his love for him, lettin it be understood that he
had not told all and that there was somethin in his feelins for the
Emperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he shared
the adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken of
as the "anel incarnate."

Durin Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoinin the army, he did
not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She was very
pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was at
the period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no time
for that sort of thin and a youn man fears to bind himself and prizes
his freedom which he needs for so many other thins. When he thouht of
Sonya, durin this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there will
be, and there are, many more such irls somewhere whom I do not yet
know. There will be time enouh to think about love when I want to, but
now I have no time." Besides, it seemed to him that the society of women
was rather deroatory to his manhood. He went to balls and into ladies'
society with an affectation of doin so aainst his will. The races, the
Enlish Club, sprees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house--that
was another matter and quite the thin for a dashin youn hussar!

At the beinnin of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranin
a dinner in honor of Prince Baration at the Enlish Club.

The count walked up and down the hall in his dressin own, ivin
orders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the club's head
cook, about asparaus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and fish for
this dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee of the
club from the day it was founded. To him the club entrusted the
arranement of the festival in honor of Baration, for few men knew so
well how to arrane a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale, and
still fewer men would be so well able and willin to make up out of
their own resources what miht be needed for the success of the fete.
The club cook and the steward listened to the count's orders with
pleased faces, for they knew that under no other manaement could they
so easily extract a ood profit for themselves from a dinner costin
several thousand rubles.

"Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!"

"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.

The count considered.

"We can't have less--yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," said he,
bendin down a finer.

"Then am I to order those lare sterlets?" asked the steward.

"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I was
forettin. We must have another entree. Ah, oodness racious!" he
clutched at his head. "Who is oin to et me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,
Dmitri! allop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum who
appeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the ardener, to set
the serfs to work. Say that everythin out of the hothouses must be
brouht here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots here
on Friday."

Havin iven several more orders, he was about to o to his "little
countess" to have a rest, but rememberin somethin else of importance,
he returned aain, called back the cook and the club steward, and aain
bean ivin orders. A liht footstep and the clinkin of spurs were
heard at the door, and the youn count, handsome, rosy, with a dark
little mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life in
Moscow, entered the room.

"Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile, as if
he felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you would only help a
bit! I must have siners too. I shall have my own orchestra, but
shouldn't we et the ypsy siners as well? You military men like that
sort of thin."

"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Baration worried himself less before
the battle of Schon rabern than you do now," said his son with a smile.

The old count pretended to be anry.

"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"

And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectful
expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
son.

"What have the youn people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he.
"Lauhin at us old fellows!"

"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a ood
dinner, but providin it and servin it all up, that's not their
business!"

"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and aily seizin his son
by both hands, he cried, "Now I've ot you, so take the sleih and pair
at once, and o to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you to
ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't et them from
anyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to o in and ask the
princesses; and from there o on to the Rasulyay--the coachman Ipatka
knows--and look up the ypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced at Count
Orlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, and brin him alon to
me."

"And am I to brin the ypsy irls alon with him?" asked Nicholas,
lauhin. "Dear, dear!..."

At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,
preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna
Mikhaylovna entered the hall. Thouh she came upon the count in his
dressin own every day, he invariably became confused and beed her to
excuse his costume.

"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closin her eyes.
"But I'll o to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we shall
et anythin we want from his hothouses. I have to see him in any case.
He has forwarded me a letter from Boris. Thank od, Boris is now on the
staff."

The count was delihted at Anna Mikhaylovna's takin upon herself one of
his commissions and ordered the small closed carriae for her.

"Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his wife with him?"
he asked.

Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted
on her face.

"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If what we hear
is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thin when we
were rejoicin at his happiness! And such a lofty anelic soul as youn
Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to ive him what
consolation I can."

"Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the youn and old Rostov.

Anna Mikhaylovna sihed deeply.

"Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper, "has
compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, invited him to
his house in Petersbur, and now... she has come here and that daredevil
after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishin to show her sympathy for
Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile betrayin her
sympathy for the "daredevil," as she called Dolokhov. "They say Pierre
is quite broken by his misfortune."

"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the club--it will all blow
over. It will be a tremendous banquet."

Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundred and
fifty members of the Enlish Club and fifty uests were awaitin the
uest of honor and hero of the Austrian campain, Prince Baration, to
dinner.

On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow had
been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
that on receivin news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,
while others souht some extraordinary explanation of so strane an
event. In the Enlish Club, where all who were distinuished, important,
and well informed foreathered when the news bean to arrive in
December, nothin was said about the war and the last battle, as thouh
all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone in
conversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolorukov, Valuev, Count
Markov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show themselves at the club, but
met in private houses in intimate circles, and the Moscovites who took
their opinions from others--Ilya Rostov amon them--remained for a while
without any definite opinion on the subject of the war and without
leaders. The Moscovites felt that somethin was wron and that to
discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best to be silent. But
after a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the biwis who
uided the club's opinion reappeared, and everybody bean speakin
clearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the incredible, unheard-
of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat, everythin became clear,
and in all corners of Moscow the same thins bean to be said. These
reasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective commissariat,
the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Laneron,
Kutuzov's incapacity, and (it was whispered) the youth and inexperience
of the soverein, who had trusted worthless and insinificant people.
But the army, the Russian army, everyone declared, was extraordinary and
had achieved miracles of valor. The soldiers, officers, and enerals
were heroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince Baration, distinuished
by his Schon rabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz, where he
alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beaten back an
enemy force twice as numerous as his own. What also conduced to
Baration's bein selected as Moscow's hero was the fact that he had no
connections in the city and was a straner there. In his person, honor
was shown to a simple fihtin Russian soldier without connections and
intriues, and to one who was associated by memories of the Italian
campain with the name of Suvorov. Moreover, payin such honor to
Baration was the best way of expressin disapproval and dislike of
Kutuzov.

"Had there been no Baration, it would have been necessary to invent
him," said the wit Shinshin, parodyin the words of Voltaire. Kutuzov no
one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers, callin him a
court weathercock and an old satyr.

All Moscow repeated Prince Dolorukov's sayin: "If you o on modelin
and modelin you must et smeared with clay," suestin consolation for
our defeat by the memory of former victories; and the words of
Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle by
hihfalutin words, and ermans by loical aruments to show them that it
is more danerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian soldiers
only need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and fresh
anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by our
officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another had
killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon sinlehanded. Ber
was mentioned, by those who did not know him, as havin, when wounded in
the riht hand, taken his sword in the left, and one forward. Of
Bolkonski, nothin was said, and only those who knew him intimately
reretted that he had died so youn, leavin a prenant wife with his
eccentric father.




CHAPTER III

On that third of March, all the rooms in the Enlish Club were filled
with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarmin in sprintime.
The members and uests of the club wandered hither and thither, sat,
stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evenin dress,
and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans.
Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockins,
stood at every door anxiously notin visitors' every movement in order
to offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respected
men with broad, self-confident faces, fat finers, and resolute estures
and voices. This class of uests and members sat in certain habitual
places and met in certain habitual roups. A minority of those present
were casual uests--chiefly youn men, amon whom were Denisov, Rostov,
and Dolokhov--who was now aain an officer in the Semenov reiment. The
faces of these youn people, especially those who were military men,
bore that expression of condescendin respect for their elders which
seems to say to the older eneration, "We are prepared to respect and
honor you, but all the same remember that the future belons to us."

Nesvitski was there as an old member of the club. Pierre, who at his
wife's command had let his hair row and abandoned his spectacles, went
about the rooms fashionably dressed but lookin sad and dull. Here, as
elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his
wealth, and bein in the habit of lordin it over these people, he
treated them with absent-minded contempt.

By his ae he should have beloned to the youner men, but by his wealth
and connections he beloned to the roups of old and honored uests, and
so he went from one roup to another. Some of the most important old men
were the center of roups which even straners approached respectfully
to hear the voices of well-known men. The larest circles formed round
Count Rostopchin, Valuev, and Naryshkin. Rostopchin was describin how
the Russians had been overwhelmed by flyin Austrians and had had to
force their way throuh them with bayonets.

Valuev was confidentially tellin that Uvarov had been sent from
Petersbur to ascertain what Moscow was thinkin about Austerlitz.

In the third circle, Naryshkin was speakin of the meetin of the
Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply to
the nonsense talked by the Austrian enerals. Shinshin, standin close
by, tried to make a joke, sayin that Kutuzov had evidently failed to
learn from Suvorov even so simple a thin as the art of crowin like a
cock, but the elder members lanced severely at the wit, makin him feel
that in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so of
Kutuzov.

Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft boots
between the dinin and drawin rooms, hastily reetin the important and
unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all equals, while his
eyes occasionally souht out his fine well-set-up youn son, restin on
him and winkin joyfully at him. Youn Rostov stood at a window with
Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made and hihly valued. The
old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov's hand.

"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been toether out
there... both playin the hero... Ah, Vasili Inatovich... How d'ye do,
old fellow?" he said, turnin to an old man who was passin, but before
he had finished his reetin there was a eneral stir, and a footman who
had run in announced, with a frihtened face: "He's arrived!"

Bells ran, the stewards rushed forward, and--like rye shaken toether
in a shovel--the uests who had been scattered about in different rooms
came toether and crowded in the lare drawin room by the door of the
ballroom.

Baration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,
which, in accord with the club custom, he had iven up to the hall
porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whip
over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battle
of Austerlitz, but wore a tiht new uniform with Russian and forein
Orders, and the Star of St. eore on his left breast. Evidently just
before comin to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,
which chaned his appearance for the worse. There was somethin naively
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile
features, ave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshev and Theodore
Uvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him, as
the uest of honor, to enter first. Baration was embarrassed, not
wishin to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly
and awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowin
what to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed
field under fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk reiment at
Schon rabern--and he would have found that easier. The committeemen met
him at the first door and, expressin their deliht at seein such a
hihly honored uest, took possession of him as it were, without waitin
for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawin room. It was
at first impossible to enter the drawin-room door for the crowd of
members and uests jostlin one another and tryin to et a ood look at
Baration over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal.
Count Ilya Rostov, lauhin and repeatin the words, "Make way, dear
boy! Make way, make way!" pushed throuh the crowd more eneretically
than anyone, led the uests into the drawin room, and seated them on
the center sofa. The biwis, the most respected members of the club,
beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, aain thrustin his way throuh the
crowd, went out of the drawin room and reappeared a minute later with
another committeeman, carryin a lare silver salver which he presented
to Prince Baration. On the salver lay some verses composed and printed
in the hero's honor. Baration, on seein the salver, lanced around in
dismay, as thouh seekin help. But all eyes demanded that he should
submit. Feelin himself in their power, he resolutely took the salver
with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count who
had presented it to him. Someone obliinly took the dish from Baration
(or he would, it seemed, have held it till evenin and have one in to
dinner with it) and drew his attention to the verses.

"Well, I will read them, then!" Baration seemed to say, and, fixin his
weary eyes on the paper, bean to read them with a fixed and serious
expression. But the author himself took the verses and bean readin
them aloud. Baration bowed his head and listened:


Brin lory then to Alexander's rein And on the throne our Titus
shield. A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man, A Rhipheus at home,
a Caesar in the field! E'en fortunate Napoleon Knows by experience, now,
Baration, And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...

But before he had finished readin, a stentorian major-domo announced
that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dinin room came
the resoundin strains of the polonaise:


Conquest's joyful thunder waken, Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...

and Count Rostov, lancin anrily at the author who went on readin his
verses, bowed to Baration. Everyone rose, feelin that dinner was more
important than verses, and Baration, aain precedin all the rest, went
in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between two
Alexanders--Bekleshev and Naryshkin--which was a sinificant allusion to
the name of the soverein. Three hundred persons took their seats in the
dinin room, accordin to their rank and importance: the more important
nearer to the honored uest, as naturally as water flows deepest where
the land lies lowest.

Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Baration,
who reconized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,
as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilya looked joyfully
and proudly around while Baration spoke to his son.

Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat
almost at the middle of the table. Facin them sat Pierre, beside Prince
Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat
facin Baration and, as the very personification of Moscow hospitality,
did the honors to the prince.

His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and the
other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the
end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions to the
footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everythin
was excellent. With the second course, a iantic sterlet (at siht of
which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmen
bean poppin corks and fillin the champane lasses. After the fish,
which made a certain sensation, the count exchaned lances with the
other committeemen. "There will be many toasts, it's time to bein," he
whispered, and takin up his lass, he rose. All were silent, waitin
for what he would say.

"To the health of our Soverein, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the same
moment his kindly eyes rew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm. The
band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful thunder waken..." All rose
and cried "Hurrah!" Baration also rose and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly
the same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon rabern.
Youn Rostov's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundred
others. He nearly wept. "To the health of our Soverein, the Emperor!"
he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptyin his lass at one ulp he dashed it to
the floor. Many followed his example, and the loud shoutin continued
for a lon time. When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the
broken lass and everybody sat down aain, smilin at the noise they had
made and exchanin remarks. The old count rose once more, lanced at a
note lyin beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of the
hero of our last campain, Prince Peter Ivanovich Baration!" and aain
his blue eyes rew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred voices
aain, but instead of the band a choir bean sinin a cantata composed
by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:


Russians! O'er all barriers on! Courae conquest uarantees; Have we not
Baration? He brins foe men to their knees,... etc.

As soon as the sinin was over, another and another toast was proposed
and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, more lass was
smashed, and the shoutin rew louder. They drank to Bekleshev,
Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to the committee, to
all the club members and to all the club uests, and finally to Count
Ilya Rostov separately, as the oranizer of the banquet. At that toast,
the count took out his handkerchief and, coverin his face, wept
outriht.




CHAPTER IV

Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he ate and
drank much, and eaerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed that
some reat chane had come over him that day. He was silent all throuh
dinner and looked about, blinkin and scowlin, or, with fixed eyes and
a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbin the bride of his
nose. His face was depressed and loomy. He seemed to see and hear
nothin of what was oin on around him and to be absorbed by some
depressin and unsolved problem.

The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints iven by the
princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concernin Dolokhov's intimacy with his
wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that mornin, which in
the mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badly
throuh his spectacles, but that his wife's connection with Dolokhov was
a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely disbelieved both the
princess' hints and the letter, but he feared now to look at Dolokhov,
who was sittin opposite him. Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov's
handsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt somethin terrible and monstrous
risin in his soul and turned quickly away. Involuntarily recallin his
wife's past and her relations with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that
what was said in the letter miht be true, or miht at least seem to be
true had it not referred to his wife. He involuntarily remembered how
Dolokhov, who had fully recovered his former position after the
campain, had returned to Petersbur and come to him. Availin himself
of his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov had
come straiht to his house, and Pierre had put him up and lent him
money. Pierre recalled how Helene had smilinly expressed disapproval of
Dolokhov's livin at their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praised
his wife's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had
not left them for a day.

"Yes, he is very handsome," thouht Pierre, "and I know him. It would be
particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me, just
because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him, and helped
him. I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasure
of deceivin me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true, but I do
not believe it. I have no riht to, and can't, believe it." He
remembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments of
cruelty, as when tyin the policeman to the bear and droppin them into
the water, or when he challened a man to a duel without any reason, or
shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That expression was often on
Dolokhov's face when lookin at him. "Yes, he is a bully," thouht
Pierre, "to kill a man means nothin to him. It must seem to him that
everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him. He must think that
I, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I am afraid of him," he thouht,
and aain he felt somethin terrible and monstrous risin in his soul.
Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov were now sittin opposite Pierre and
seemed very ay. Rostov was talkin merrily to his two friends, one of
whom was a dashin hussar and the other a notorious duelist and rake,
and every now and then he lanced ironically at Pierre, whose
preoccupied, absent-minded, and massive fiure was a very noticeable one
at the dinner. Rostov looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre
appeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a beauty,
and in a word--an old woman; and secondly because Pierre in his
preoccupation and absent-mindedness had not reconized Rostov and had
not responded to his reetin. When the Emperor's health was drunk,
Pierre, lost in thouht, did not rise or lift his lass.

"What are you about?" shouted Rostov, lookin at him in an ecstasy of
exasperation. "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"

Pierre sihed, rose submissively, emptied his lass, and, waitin till
all were seated aain, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.

"Why, I didn't reconize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwise
enaed; he was shoutin "Hurrah!"

"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov.

"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.

"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.

Pierre did not catch what they were sayin, but knew they were talkin
about him. He reddened and turned away.

"Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with a
serious expression, but with a smile lurkin at the corners of his
mouth, he turned with his lass to Pierre.

"Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin--and their lovers!" he
added.

Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his lass without lookin at
Dolokhov or answerin him. The footman, who was distributin leaflets
with Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the principal
uests. He was just oin to take it when Dolokhov, leanin across,
snatched it from his hand and bean readin it. Pierre looked at
Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the somethin terrible and monstrous that
had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him. He
leaned his whole massive body across the table.

"How dare you take it?" he shouted.

Hearin that cry and seein to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski and the
neihbor on his riht quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.

"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frihtened voices.

Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that
smile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!"

"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.

Pale, with quiverin lips, Pierre snatched the copy.

"You...! you... scoundrel! I challene you!" he ejaculated, and, pushin
back his chair, he rose from the table.

At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt
that the question of his wife's uilt which had been tormentin him the
whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative. He
hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's request
that he would take no part in the matter, Rostov areed to be Dolokhov's
second, and after dinner he discussed the arranements for the duel with
Nesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home, but Rostov with Dolokhov
and Denisov stayed on at the club till late, listenin to the ypsies
and other siners.

"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took leave
of Rostov in the club porch.

"And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.

Dolokhov paused.

"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of duelin in two words.
If you are oin to fiht a duel, and you make a will and write
affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be
killed, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But o with the firm
intention of killin your man as quickly and surely as possible, and
then all will be riht, as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tell
me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you see one your fear's
all one, and your only thouht is not to let him et away!' And that's
how it is with me. A demain, mon cher." *


* Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.

Next day, at eiht in the mornin, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to the
Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov already there.
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no
connection with the matter in hand. His haard face was yellow. He had
evidently not slept that niht. He looked about distractedly and screwed
up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely absorbed by two
considerations: his wife's uilt, of which after his sleepless niht he
had not the slihtest doubt, and the uiltlessness of Dolokhov, who had
no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothin to him.... "I
should perhaps have done the same thin in his place," thouht Pierre.
"It's even certain that I should have done the same, then why this duel,
this murder? Either I shall kill him, or he will hit me in the head, or
elbow, or knee. Can't I o away from here, run away, bury myself
somewhere?" passed throuh his mind. But just at moments when such
thouhts occurred to him, he would ask in a particularly calm and
absent-minded way, which inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will it
be lon? Are thins ready?"

When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,
and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to Pierre.

"I should not be doin my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "and
should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in
choosin me for your second, if at this rave, this very rave, moment I
did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficient round
for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.... You were not riht,
not quite in the riht, you were impetuous..."

"Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre.

"Then allow me to express your rerets, and I am sure your opponent will
accept them," said Nesvitski (who like the others concerned in the
affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that the
affair had come to an actual duel). "You know, Count, it is much more
honorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become irreparable.
There was no insult on either side. Allow me to convey...."

"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all the same....
Is everythin ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to o and where to
shoot," he said with an unnaturally entle smile.

He took the pistol in his hand and bean askin about the workin of the
trier, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact that he
did not wish to confess.

"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forot," said he.

"No apoloies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who on his side
had been attemptin a reconciliation), and he also went up to the
appointed place.

The spot chosen for the duel was some eihty paces from the road, where
the sleihs had been left, in a small clearin in the pine forest
covered with meltin snow, the frost havin beun to break up durin the
last few days. The antaonists stood forty paces apart at the farther
ede of the clearin. The seconds, measurin the paces, left tracks in
the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standin and
Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the round ten
paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawin and misty; at forty
paces' distance nothin could be seen. For three minutes all had been
ready, but they still delayed and all were silent.




CHAPTER V

"Well bein!" said Dolokhov.

"All riht," said Pierre, still smilin in the same way. A feelin of
dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lihtly beun
could no loner be averted but was takin its course independently of
men's will.

Denisov first went to the barrier and announced: "As the adve'sawies
have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your pistols, and at
the word thwee bein to advance.

"O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted anrily and stepped aside.

The combatants advanced alon the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer to
one another, beinnin to see one another throuh the mist. They had the
riht to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. Dolokhov
walked slowly without raisin his pistol, lookin intently with his
briht, sparklin blue eyes into his antaonist's face. His mouth wore
its usual semblance of a smile.

"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three," he
went quickly forward, missin the trodden path and steppin into the
deep snow. He held the pistol in his riht hand at arm's lenth,
apparently afraid of shootin himself with it. His left hand he held
carefully back, because he wished to support his riht hand with it and
knew he must not do so. Havin advanced six paces and strayed off the
track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, then quickly
lanced at Dolokhov and, bendin his finer as he had been shown, fired.
Not at all expectin so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound and
then, smilin at his own sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendered
denser by the mist, prevented him from seein anythin for an instant,
but there was no second report as he had expected. He only heard
Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his fiure came in view throuh the smoke.
He was pressin one hand to his left side, while the other clutched his
droopin pistol. His face was pale. Rostov ran toward him and said
somethin.

"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov throuh his teeth, "no, it's not over." And
after stumblin a few staerin steps riht up to the saber, he sank on
the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped it on his coat
and supported himself with it. His frownin face was pallid and
quivered.

"Plea..." bean Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.

"Please," he uttered with an effort.

Pierre, hardly restrainin his sobs, bean runnin toward Dolokhov and
was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried:

"To your barrier!" and Pierre, raspin what was meant, stopped by his
saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to the
snow, reedily bit at it, aain raised his head, adjusted himself, drew
in his les and sat up, seekin a firm center of ravity. He sucked and
swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still smilin,
littered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remainin
strenth. He raised his pistol and aimed.

"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.

"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.

Pierre, with a entle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and les
helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facin
Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitski
closed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report and
Dolokhov's anry cry.

"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on the
snow.

Pierre clutched his temples, and turnin round went into the forest,
tramplin throuh the deep snow, and mutterin incoherent words:

"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckerin his face.

Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.

Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.

The latter lay silent in the sleih with closed eyes and did not answer
a word to the questions addressed to him. But on enterin Moscow he
suddenly came to and, liftin his head with an effort, took Rostov, who
was sittin beside him, by the hand. Rostov was struck by the totally
altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov's
face.

"Well? How do you feel?" he asked.

"Bad! But it's not that, my friend-" said Dolokhov with a aspin voice.
"Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have killed her,
killed... She won't et over it! She won't survive...."

"Who?" asked Rostov.

"My mother! My mother, my anel, my adored anel mother," and Dolokhov
pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.

When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov that he was
livin with his mother, who, if she saw him dyin, would not survive it.
He implored Rostov to o on and prepare her.

Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his reat surprise
learned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
with an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionate
of sons and brothers.




CHAPTER VI

Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersbur and in
Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The niht after the duel
he did not o to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his
father's room, that hue room in which Count Bezukhov had died.

He lay down on the sofa meanin to fall asleep and foret all that had
happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelins,
thouhts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall
asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the
room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of
their marriae, with bare shoulders and a lanuid, passionate look on
her face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov's handsome,
insolent, hard, and mockin face as he had seen it at the banquet, and
then that same face pale, quiverin, and sufferin, as it had been when
he reeled and sank on the snow.

"What has happened?" he asked himself. "I have killed her lover, yes,
killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come to do
it?"--"Because you married her," answered an inner voice.

"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marryin her without lovin
her; in deceivin yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that moment
after supper at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those words he had found
so difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from that! Even then
I felt it," he thouht. "I felt then that it was not so, that I had no
riht to do it. And so it turns out."

He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.
Particularly vivid, humiliatin, and shameful was the recollection of
how one day soon after his marriae he came out of the bedroom into his
study a little before noon in his silk dressin own and found his head
steward there, who, bowin respectfully, looked into his face and at his
dressin own and smiled slihtly, as if expressin respectful
understandin of his employer's happiness.

"But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic beauty
and social tact," thouht he; "been proud of my house, in which she
received all Petersbur, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. So
this is what I was proud of! I then thouht that I did not understand
her. How often when considerin her character I have told myself that I
was to blame for not understandin her, for not understandin that
constant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,
and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depraved
woman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has become
clear.

"Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss her
naked shoulders. She did not ive him the money, but let herself be
kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she replied
with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: 'Let him
do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if she
felt any symptoms of prenancy. She lauhed contemptuously and said she
was not a fool to want to have children, and that she was not oin to
have any children by me."

Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thouhts and the
vularity of the expressions that were natural to her, thouh she had
been brouht up in the most aristocratic circles.

"I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous promener," *
she used to say. Often seein the success she had with youn and old men
and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.


* "You clear out of this."

"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a depraved
woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And now there's
Dolokhov sittin in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dyin,
while meetin my remorse with some forced bravado!"

Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what is
called weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. He
diested his sufferins alone.

"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that? Why
did I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' * to her, which
was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am uilty and must endure... what? A
slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's nonsense," he
thouht. "The slur on my name and honor--that's all apart from myself."


* I love you.

"Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and a
criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view they
were riht, as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr's
death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for bein a despot.
Who is riht and who is wron? No one! But if you are alive--live:
tomorrow you'll die as I miht have died an hour ao. And is it worth
tormentin oneself, when one has only a moment of life in comparison
with eternity?"

But at the moment when he imained himself calmed by such reflections,
she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he had
most stronly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the
blood rush to his heart and had aain to et up and move about and break
and tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vous
aime'?" he kept repeatin to himself. And when he had said it for the
tenth time, Moliere's words: "Mais que diable allait-il faire dans cette
alere?"* occurred to him, and he bean to lauh at himself.


* "But what the devil was he doin in that alley?"

In the niht he called his valet and told him to pack up to o to
Petersbur. He could not imaine how he could speak to her now. He
resolved to o away next day and leave a letter informin her of his
intention to part from her forever.

Next mornin when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierre
was lyin asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.

He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,
unable to realize where he was.

"The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home,"
said the valet.

But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countess
herself in a white satin dressin own embroidered with silver and with
simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like
a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was a
wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With her
imperturbable calm she did not bein to speak in front of the valet. She
knew of the duel and had come to speak about it. She waited till the
valet had set down the coffee thins and left the room. Pierre looked at
her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her
enemies, he tried to continue readin. But feelin this to be senseless
and impossible, he aain lanced timidly at her. She did not sit down
but looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waitin for the valet to
o.

"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should like to
know?" she asked sternly.

"I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre.

"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about? What
is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."

Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth, but
could not reply.

"If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believe
everythin you're told. You were told..." Helene lauhed, "that Dolokhov
was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech,
utterin the word amant as casually as any other word, "and you believed
it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? That you're a
fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that. What will be the
result? That I shall be the lauhinstock of all Moscow, that everyone
will say that you, drunk and not knowin what you were about, challened
a man you are jealous of without cause." Helene raised her voice and
became more and more excited, "A man who's a better man than you in
every way..."

"Hm... Hm...!" rowled Pierre, frownin without lookin at her, and not
movin a muscle.

"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like his
company? If you were cleverer and more areeable, I should prefer
yours."

"Don't speak to me... I be you," muttered Pierre hoarsely.

"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you plainly
that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would not
have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so," said she.

Pierre wished to say somethin, looked at her with eyes whose strane
expression she did not understand, and lay down aain. He was sufferin
physically at that moment, there was a weiht on his chest and he could
not breathe. He knew that he must do somethin to put an end to this
sufferin, but what he wanted to do was too terrible.

"We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.

"Separate? Very well, but only if you ive me a fortune," said Helene.
"Separate! That's a thin to frihten me with!"

Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staerin toward her.

"I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizin the marble top of a table with
a strenth he had never before felt, he made a step toward her
brandishin the slab.

Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and spran aside. His
father's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
deliht of frenzy. He flun down the slab, broke it, and swoopin down
on her with outstretched hands shouted, "et out!" in such a terrible
voice that the whole house heard it with horror. od knows what he would
have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room.

A week later Pierre ave his wife full power to control all his estates
in reat Russia, which formed the larer part of his property, and left
for Petersbur alone.




CHAPTER VII

Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz and
the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of the
letters sent throuh the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of
all for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility of
his havin been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the place
and that he miht now be lyin, recoverin or dyin, alone amon
straners and unable to send news of himself. The azettes from which
the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usual
very briefly and vauely, that after brilliant enaements the Russians
had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The
old prince understood from this official report that our army had been
defeated. A week after the azette report of the battle of Austerlitz
came a letter from Kutuzov informin the prince of the fate that had
befallen his son.

"Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his hand
and at the head of a reiment--he fell as a hero, worthy of his father
and his fatherland. To the reat reret of myself and of the whole army
it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort myself and
you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would have
been mentioned amon the officers found on the field of battle, a list
of whom has been sent me under fla of truce."

After receivin this news late in the evenin, when he was alone in his
study, the old prince went for his walk as usual next mornin, but he
was silent with his steward, the ardener, and the architect, and thouh
he looked very rim he said nothin to anyone.

When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was workin at his
lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.

"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice, throwin
down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus, and
Princess Mary lon remembered the dyin creak of that wheel, which
mered in her memory with what followed.)

She approached him, saw his face, and somethin ave way within her. Her
eyes rew dim. By the expression of her father's face, not sad, not
crushed, but anry and workin unnaturally, she saw that hanin over
her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst in
life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and incomprehensible-
-the death of one she loved.

"Father! Andrew!"--said the unraceful, awkward princess with such an
indescribable charm of sorrow and self-foretfulness that her father
could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.

"Bad news! He's not amon the prisoners nor amon the killed! Kutuzov
writes..." and he screamed as piercinly as if he wished to drive the
princess away by that scream... "Killed!"

The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on
hearin these words her face chaned and somethin brihtened in her
beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy--a supreme joy apart from the
joys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the reat rief within her.
She forot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, and
drawin him down put her arm round his thin, scray neck.

"Father," she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep toether."

"Scoundrels! Blackuards!" shrieked the old man, turnin his face away
from her. "Destroyin the army, destroyin the men! And why? o, o and
tell Lise."

The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father and
wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he took
leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tender
and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Did he believe?
Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms
of eternal peace and blessedness?" she thouht.

"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked throuh her tears.

"o! o! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and Russia's
lory were led to destruction. o, Princess Mary. o and tell Lise. I
will follow."

When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
workin and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm
peculiar to prenant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see
Princess Mary but were lookin within... into herself... at somethin
joyful and mysterious takin place within her.

"Mary," she said, movin away from the embroidery frame and lyin back,
"ive me your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand and held it below
her waist.

Her eyes were smilin expectantly, her downy lip rose and remained
lifted in childlike happiness.

Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her
sister-in-law's dress.

"There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strane. And do you know, Mary,
I am oin to love him very much," said Lise, lookin with briht and
happy eyes at her sister-in-law.

Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weepin.

"What is the matter, Mary?"

"Nothin... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wipin away
her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.

Several times in the course of the mornin Princess Mary bean tryin to
prepare her sister-in-law, and every time bean to cry. Unobservant as
was the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not
understand, aitated her. She said nothin but looked about uneasily as
if in search of somethin. Before dinner the old prince, of whom she was
always afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malin
expression and went out aain without sayin a word. She looked at
Princess Mary, then sat thinkin for a while with that expression of
attention to somethin within her that is only seen in prenant women,
and suddenly bean to cry.

"Has anythin come from Andrew?" she asked.

"No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I
feel afraid."

"So there's nothin?"

"Nothin," answered Princess Mary, lookin firmly with her radiant eyes
at her sister-in-law.

She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide the
terrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expected
within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
their rief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:
he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and thouh he
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a
monument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own arden to his
memory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried not
to chane his former way of life, but his strenth failed him. He walked
less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary
hoped. She prayed for her brother as livin and was always awaitin news
of his return.




CHAPTER VIII

"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the mornin of
the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit, but
as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and even
every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so now
the smile of the little princess--influenced by the eneral mood thouh
without knowin its cause--was such as to remind one still more of the
eneral sorrow.

"Dearest, I'm afraid this mornin's fruschtique *--as Foka the cook
calls it--has disareed with me."


* Fruhstuck: breakfast.

"What is the matter with you, my darlin? You look pale. Oh, you are
very pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, runnin with her soft,
ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law.

"Your excellency, should not Mary Bodanovna be sent for?" said one of
the maids who was present. (Mary Bodanovna was a midwife from the
neihborin town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortniht.)

"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll o. Courae,
my anel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.

"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical sufferin on the
little princess' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain
showed itself.

"No, it's only indiestion?... Say it's only indiestion, say so, Mary!
Say..." And the little princess bean to cry capriciously like a
sufferin child and to wrin her little hands even with some
affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bodanovna.

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.

The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbin her small, plump
white hands with an air of calm importance.

"Mary Bodanovna, I think it's beinnin!" said Princess Mary lookin at
the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.

"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bodanovna, not
hastenin her steps. "You youn ladies should not know anythin about
it."

"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the
princess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes they had
sent in ood time to Moscow for a doctor and were expectin him at any
moment.)

"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bodanovna. "We'll
manae very well without a doctor."

Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard somethin heavy
bein carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carryin the
lare leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. On their
faces was a quiet and solemn look.

Princess Mary sat alone in her room listenin to the sounds in the
house, now and then openin her door when someone passed and watchin
what was oin on in the passae. Some women passin with quiet steps in
and out of the bedroom lanced at the princess and turned away. She did
not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door aain, now sittin
down in her easy chair, now takin her prayer book, now kneelin before
the icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers
did not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old
nurse, Praskovya Savishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the old
prince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl round
her head.

"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and here I've
brouht the prince's weddin candles to liht before his saint, my
anel," she said with a sih.

"Oh, nurse, I'm so lad!"

"od is merciful, birdie."

The nurse lit the ilt candles before the icons and sat down by the door
with her knittin. Princess Mary took a book and bean readin. Only
when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the
princess anxious and inquirin, the nurse encourain. Everyone in the
house was dominated by the same feelin that Princess Mary experienced
as she sat in her room. But owin to the superstition that the fewer the
people who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyone
tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
ordinary staid and respectful ood manners habitual in the prince's
household, a common anxiety, a softenin of the heart, and a
consciousness that somethin reat and mysterious was bein accomplished
at that moment made itself felt.

There was no lauhter in the maids' lare hall. In the men servants'
hall all sat waitin, silently and alert. In the outlyin serfs'
quarters torches and candles were burnin and no one slept. The old
prince, steppin on his heels, paced up and down his study and sent
Tikhon to ask Mary Bodanovna what news.--"Say only that 'the prince
told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer."

"Inform the prince that labor has beun," said Mary Bodanovna, ivin
the messener a sinificant look.

Tikhon went and told the prince.

"Very ood!" said the prince closin the door behind him, and Tikhon did
not hear the slihtest sound from the study after that.

After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seein
the prince was lyin on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbed
face, shook his head, and oin up to him silently kissed him on the
shoulder and left the room without snuffin the candles or sayin why he
had entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.
Evenin passed, niht came, and the feelin of suspense and softenin of
heart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.
No one slept.

It was one of those March nihts when winter seems to wish to resume its
sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relay
of horses had been sent up the hihroad to meet the erman doctor from
Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanterns
were sent to the crossroads to uide him over the country road with its
hollows and snow-covered pools of water.

Princess Mary had lon since put aside her book: she sat silent, her
luminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of which
she knew so well), on the lock of ray hair that escaped from under the
kerchief, and the loose skin that hun under her chin.

Nurse Savishna, knittin in hand, was tellin in low tones, scarcely
hearin or understandin her own words, what she had told hundreds of
times before: how the late princess had iven birth to Princess Mary in
Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of a
midwife.

"od is merciful, doctors are never needed," she said.

Suddenly a ust of wind beat violently aainst the casement of the
window, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of the
prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks
returned), and, forcin open a loosely closed latch, set the damask
curtain flappin and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.
Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, puttin down the stockin she was
knittin, went to the window and leanin out tried to catch the open
casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loose
locks of ray hair.

"Princess, my dear, there's someone drivin up the avenue!" she said,
holdin the casement and not closin it. "With lanterns. Most likely the
doctor."

"Oh, my od! thank od!" said Princess Mary. "I must o and meet him, he
does not know Russian."

Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.
As she was crossin the anteroom she saw throuh the window a carriae
with lanterns, standin at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. On
a banister post stood a tallow candle which uttered in the draft. On
the landin below, Philip, the footman, stood lookin scared and holdin
another candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one could
hear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice that
seemed familiar to Princess Mary was sayin somethin.

"Thank od!" said the voice. "And Father?"

"one to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who was
downstairs.

Then the voice said somethin more, Demyan replied, and the steps in the
felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.

"It's Andrew!" thouht Princess Mary. "No it can't be, that would be too
extraordinary," and at the very moment she thouht this, the face and
fiure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of which covered
with snow, appeared on the landin where the footman stood with the
candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a chaned and stranely
softened but aitated expression on his face. He came up the stairs and
embraced his sister.

"You did not et my letter?" he asked, and not waitin for a reply--
which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to speak--
he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs aain with the doctor who had
entered the hall after him (they had met at the last post station), and
aain embraced his sister.

"What a strane fate, Masha darlin!" And havin taken off his cloak and
felt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.




CHAPTER IX

The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on her
head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay round
her inflamed and perspirin cheeks, her charmin rosy mouth with its
downy lip was open and she was smilin joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
and paused facin her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lyin.
Her litterin eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested
on him without chanin their expression. "I love you all and have done
no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!" her look seemed to
say. She saw her husband, but did not realize the sinificance of his
appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed
her forehead.

"My darlin!" he said--a word he had never used to her before. "od is
merciful...."

She looked at him inquirinly and with childlike reproach.

"I expected help from you and I et none, none from you either!" said
her eyes. She was not surprised at his havin come; she did not realize
that he had come. His comin had nothin to do with her sufferins or
with their relief. The pans bean aain and Mary Bodanovna advised
Prince Andrew to leave the room.

The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meetin Princess Mary,
aain joined her. They bean talkin in whispers, but their talk broke
off at every moment. They waited and listened.

"o, dear," said Princess Mary.

Prince Andrew went aain to his wife and sat waitin in the room next to
hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frihtened face and became
confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his hands
and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless, animal moans came
throuh the door. Prince Andrew ot up, went to the door, and tried to
open it. Someone was holdin it shut.

"You can't come in! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.

He bean pacin the room. The screamin ceased, and a few more seconds
went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek--it could not be hers, she
could not scream like that--came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran to
the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.

"What have they taken a baby in there for?" thouht Prince Andrew in the
first second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or is
the baby born?"

Then suddenly he realized the joyful sinificance of that wail; tears
choked him, and leanin his elbows on the window sill be bean to cry,
sobbin like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves
tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a tremblin jaw, came out of
the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor ave him a
bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out and
seein Prince Andrew stopped, hesitatin on the threshold. He went into
his wife's room. She was lyin dead, in the same position he had seen
her in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of
the cheeks, the same expression was on her charmin childlike face with
its upper lip covered with tiny black hair.

"I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you done
to me?"--said her charmin, pathetic, dead face.

In a corner of the room somethin red and tiny ave a runt and squealed
in Mary Bodanovna's tremblin white hands.

Two hours later Prince Andrew, steppin softly, went into his father's
room. The old man already knew everythin. He was standin close to the
door and as soon as it opened his rouh old arms closed like a vise
round his son's neck, and without a word he bean to sob like a child.

Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went
up the steps to where the coffin stood, to ive her the farewell kiss.
And there in the coffin was the same face, thouh with closed eyes. "Ah,
what have you done to me?" it still seemed to say, and Prince Andrew
felt that somethin ave way in his soul and that he was uilty of a sin
he could neither remedy nor foret. He could not weep. The old man too
came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one
on the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say:
"Ah, what have you done to me, and why?" And at the siht the old man
turned anrily away.

Another five days passed, and then the youn Prince Nicholas Andreevich
was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin, while
the priest with a oose feather anointed the boy's little red and
wrinkled soles and palms.

His randfather, who was his odfather, tremblin and afraid of droppin
him, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over
to the odmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited
the termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at the baby when
the nurse brouht it to him and nodded approval when she told him that
the wax with the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.




CHAPTER X

Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the
efforts of the old count, and instead of bein deraded to the ranks as
he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the overnor eneral of
Moscow. As a result he could not o to the country with the rest of the
family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties. Dolokhov
recovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him durin his
convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved him
passionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had rown fond of
Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about her
son.

"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled for our
present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like a
reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it riht, was it
honorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved him and
even now never says a word aainst him. Those pranks in Petersbur when
they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it toether? And
there! Bezukhov ot off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the whole
burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to o throuh! It's true he
has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that? I think there
were not many such allant sons of the fatherland out there as he. And
now--this duel! Have these people no feelin, or honor? Knowin him to
be an only son, to challene him and shoot so straiht! It's well od
had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have intriues
nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see thins he should have
shown it sooner, but he lets it o on for months. And then to call him
out, reckonin on Fedya not fihtin because he owed him money! What
baseness! What meanness! I know you understand Fedya, my dear count;
that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few people do understand
him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"

Dolokhov himself durin his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way no
one would have expected of him.

"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't care
a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I love so that
I would ive my life for them, and the others I'd throttle if they stood
in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two or three
friends--you amon them--and as for the rest I only care about them in
so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them are harmful,
especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "I have met lovin,
noble, hih-minded men, but I have not yet met any women--countesses or
cooks--who were not venal. I have not yet met that divine purity and
devotion I look for in women. If I found such a one I'd ive my life for
her! But those!..." and he made a esture of contempt. "And believe me,
if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such a
divine creature, who will reenerate, purify, and elevate me. But you
don't understand it."

"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rostov, who was under his new
friend's influence.

In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winter
Denisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of the
winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one of the
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brouht
many youn men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome irl of
twenty; Sonya a irl of sixteen with all the charm of an openin flower;
Natasha, half rown up and half child, was now childishly amusin, now
irlishly enchantin.

At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere
characteristic of homes where there are very youn and very charmin
irls. Every youn man who came to the house--seein those
impressionable, smilin youn faces (smilin probably at their own
happiness), feelin the eaer bustle around him, and hearin the fitful
bursts of son and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of
youn irls ready for anythin and full of hope--experienced the same
feelin; sharin with the youn folk of the Rostovs' household a
readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.

Amon the youn men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov,
whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She almost quarreled
with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad man, and that
in the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was riht and Dolokhov wron, and
further that he was disareeable and unnatural.

"There's nothin for me to understand," she cried out with resolute
self-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisov
thouh he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I do
understand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everythin is
calculated, and I don't like that. But Denisov..."

"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implyin that even
Denisov was nothin compared to Dolokhov--"you must understand what a
soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother. What a
heart!"

"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And do
you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"

"What nonsense..."

"I'm certain of it; you'll see."

Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually care for
the society of ladies, bean to come often to the house, and the
question for whose sake he came (thouh no one spoke of it) was soon
settled. He came because of Sonya. And Sonya, thouh she would never
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov
appeared.

Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs', never missed a performance at
which they were present, and went to Ioel's balls for youn people
which the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sonya
and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
lances without colorin, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed
when they saw his looks.

It was evident that this strane, stron man was under the irresistible
influence of the dark, raceful irl who loved another.

Rostov noticed somethin new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but he
did not explain to himself what these new relations were. "They're
always in love with someone," he thouht of Sonya and Natasha. But he
was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was less
frequently at home.

In the autumn of 1806 everybody had aain beun talkin of the war with
Napoleon with even reater warmth than the year before. Orders were
iven to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the reular army,
and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everywhere
Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothin but the comin war was
talked of. For the Rostov family the whole interest of these
preparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of
remainin in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denisov's
furlouh after Christmas to return with him to their reiment. His
approachin departure did not prevent his amusin himself, but rather
ave zest to his pleasures. He spent the reater part of his time away
from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.




CHAPTER XI

On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thin he had
rarely done of late. It was a rand farewell dinner, as he and Denisov
were leavin to join their reiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
were present, includin Dolokhov and Denisov.

Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous
atmosphere made itself so stronly felt in the Rostovs' house as at this
holiday time. "Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved! That
is the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is the one thin
we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.

Nicholas, havin as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without
visitin all the places he meant to o to and where he had been invited,
returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and
felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a
curious embarrassment amon some of those present. Sonya, Dolokhov, and
the old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser deree
Natasha. Nicholas understood that somethin must have happened between
Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitiveness
natural to him was very entle and wary with them both at dinner. On
that same evenin there was to be one of the balls that Ioel (the
dancin master) ave for his pupils durin the holidays.

"Nicholas, will you come to Ioel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "He asked
you, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also oin."


* Denisov.

"Where would I not o at the countess' command!" said Denisov, who at
the Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's kniht. "I'm
even weady to dance the pas de chale."

"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the Arkharovs; they
have a party."

"And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked the question
he noticed that it should not have been put.

"Perhaps," coldly and anrily replied Dolokhov, lancin at Sonya, and,
scowlin, he ave Nicholas just such a look as he had iven Pierre at
the club dinner.

"There is somethin up," thouht Nicholas, and he was further confirmed
in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately after
dinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was the matter.

"And I was lookin for you," said Natasha runnin out to him. "I told
you, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He has
proposed to Sonya!"

Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, somethin
seemed to ive way within him at this news. Dolokhov was a suitable and
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan irl. From
the point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the
question for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas' first feelin on
hearin the news was one of aner with Sonya.... He tried to say,
"That's capital; of course she'll foret her childish promises and
accept the offer," but before he had time to say it Natasha bean aain.

"And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" addin, after a pause,
"she told him she loved another."

"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thouht Nicholas.

"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't chane
once she has said..."

"And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas reproachfully.

"Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be anry--but I know
you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certain
that you won't marry her."

"Now you don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must talk to
her. What a darlin Sonya is!" he added with a smile.

"Ah, she is indeed a darlin! I'll send her to you."

And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.

A minute later Sonya came in with a frihtened, uilty, and scared look.
Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first time
since his return that they had talked alone and about their love.

"Sophie," he bean, timidly at first and then more and more boldly, "if
you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and advantaeous
match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."

Sonya interrupted him.

"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.

"If you are refusin for my sake, I am afraid that I..."

Sonya aain interrupted. She ave him an implorin, frihtened look.

"Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said.

"No, but I must. It may be arroant of me, but still it is best to say
it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I
love you, and I think I love you more than anyone else...."

"That is enouh for me," said Sonya, blushin.

"No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in love
aain, thouh for no one have I such a feelin of friendship,
confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am youn. Mamma does not
wish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I be you to consider
Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulatin his friend's name with
difficulty.

"Don't say that to me! I want nothin. I love you as a brother and
always shall, and I want nothin more."

"You are an anel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleadin
you."

And Nicholas aain kissed her hand.




CHAPTER XII

Ioel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers as
they watched their youn people executin their newly learned steps, and
so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they were
ready to drop, and so said the rown-up youn men and women who came to
these balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable.
That year two marriaes had come of these balls. The two pretty youn
Princesses orchakov met suitors there and were married and so further
increased the fame of these dances. What distinuished them from others
was the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the ood-natured
Ioel, flyin about like a feather and bowin accordin to the rules of
his art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors. There was
the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves
as irls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearin lon dresses for
the first time. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to
be, pretty--so rapturous were their smiles and so sparklin their eyes.
Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was exceptionally
raceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, but at this last ball
only the ecossaise, the anlaise, and the mazurka, which was just comin
into fashion, were danced. Ioel had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov's
house, and the ball, as everyone said, was a reat success. There were
many pretty irls and the Rostov irls were amon the prettiest. They
were both particularly happy and ay. That evenin, proud of Dolokhov's
proposal, her refusal, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled
about before she left home so that the maid could hardly et her hair
plaited, and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy.

Natasha no less proud of her first lon dress and of bein at a real
ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pink
ribbons.

Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She was
not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever
person she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.

"Oh, how delihtful it is!" she kept sayin, runnin up to Sonya.

Nicholas and Denisov were walkin up and down, lookin with kindly
patronae at the dancers.

"How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.

"Who?"

"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov.

"And how she dances! What wace!" he said aain after a pause.

"Who are you talkin about?"

"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.

Rostov smiled.

"My dear count, you were one of my best pupils--you must dance," said
little Ioel comin up to Nicholas. "Look how many charmin youn
ladies-" He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also a
former pupil of his.

"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't you
wecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"


"Oh no!" said Ioel, hastenin to reassure him. "You were only
inattentive, but you had talent--oh yes, you had talent!"

The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not
refuse Ioel and asked Sonya to dance. Denisov sat down by the old
ladies and, leanin on his saber and beatin time with his foot, told
them somethin funny and kept them amused, while he watched the youn
people dancin, Ioel with Natasha, his pride and his best pupil, were
the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully steppin with his little feet
in low shoes, Ioel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, thouh
shy, went on carefully executin her steps. Denisov did not take his
eyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearly
indicated that if he was not dancin it was because he would not and not
because he could not. In the middle of a fiure he beckoned to Rostov
who was passin:

"This is not at all the thin," he said. "What sort of Polish mazuwka is
this? But she does dance splendidly."

Knowin that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly
way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natasha:

"o and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!" he said.

When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,
trippin rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran
timidly to the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody was
lookin at her and waitin. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusin
thouh he smiled delihtedly. He ran up to them.

"Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was sayin, "do come!"

"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.

"Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas.

"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokinly.

"I'll sin for you a whole evenin," said Natasha.

"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anythin with me!" said Denisov, and he
unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped his
partner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,
waitin for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was
Denisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he
felt himself to be. At the riht beat of the music he looked sideways at
his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with one
foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew round the room takin
his partner with him. He lided silently on one foot half across the
room, and seemin not to notice the chairs was dashin straiht at them,
when suddenly, clinkin his spurs and spreadin out his les, he stopped
short on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot clankin his
spurs, whirled rapidly round, and, strikin his left heel aainst his
riht, flew round aain in a circle. Natasha uessed what he meant to
do, and abandonin herself to him followed his lead hardly knowin how.
First he spun her round, holdin her now with his left, now with his
riht hand, then fallin on one knee he twirled her round him, and aain
jumpin up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would
rush throuh the whole suite of rooms without drawin breath, and then
he suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When at
last, smartly whirlin his partner round in front of her chair, he drew
up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not even make
him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement, smilin as if she
did not reconize him.

"What does this mean?" she brouht out.

Althouh Ioel did not acknowlede this to be the real mazurka, everyone
was delihted with Denisov's skill, he was asked aain and aain as a
partner, and the old men bean smilinly to talk about Poland and the
ood old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka and moppin himself
with his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the
rest of the evenin.




CHAPTER XIII

For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or at
Dolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:

As I do not intend to be at your house aain for reasons you know of,
and am oin to rejoin my reiment, I am ivin a farewell supper
toniht to my friends--come to the Enlish Hotel.

About ten o'clock Rostov went to the Enlish Hotel straiht from the
theater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at once
shown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evenin. Some
twenty men were athered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between two
candles. On the table was a pile of old and paper money, and he was
keepin the bank. Rostov had not seen him since his proposal and Sonya's
refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thouht of how they would meet.

Dolokhov's clear, cold lance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door,
as thouh he had lon expected him.

"It's a lon time since we met," he said. "Thanks for comin. I'll just
finish dealin, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus."

"I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, reddenin.

Dolokhov made no reply.

"You may punt," he said.

Rostov recalled at that moment a strane conversation he had once had
with Dolokhov. "None but fools trust to luck in play," Dolokhov had then
said.

"Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as if uessin
Rostov's thouht.

Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the club
dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felt
a need to escape from it by some strane, and usually cruel, action.

Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke with
which to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thouht of
anythin, Dolokhov, lookin straiht in his face, said slowly and
deliberately so that everyone could hear:

"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool who trusts to
luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."

"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.

"Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and sprinin a new pack
of cards said: "Bank, entlemen!"

Movin the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by his
side and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept lancin at him.

"Why don't you play?" he asked.

And strane to say Nicholas felt that he could not help takin up a
card, puttin a small stake on it, and beinnin to play.

"I have no money with me," he said.

"I'll trust you."

Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked aain, and aain
lost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov's runnin.

"entlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Please
place your money on the cards or I may et muddled in the reckonin."

One of the players said he hoped he miht be trusted.

"Yes, you miht, but I am afraid of ettin the accounts mixed. So I ask
you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don't stint
yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turnin to Rostov.

The ame continued; a waiter kept handin round champane.

All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eiht hundred rubles scored up
aainst him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while the waiter
filled his lass he chaned his mind and altered it to his usual stake
of twenty rubles.

"Leave it," said Dolokhov, thouh he did not seem to be even lookin at
Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others but win
from you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked aain.

Rostov submitted. He let the eiht hundred remain and laid down a seven
of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. He
well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts,
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clear
upriht fiures; he emptied the lass of warm champane that was handed
him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sinkin heart, waitin for a
seven to turn up, azed at Dolokhov's hands which held the pack. Much
depended on Rostov's winnin or losin on that seven of hearts. On the
previous Sunday the old count had iven his son two thousand rubles, and
thouh he always disliked speakin of money difficulties had told
Nicholas that this was all he could let him have till May, and asked him
to be more economical this time. Nicholas had replied that it would be
more than enouh for him and that he ave his word of honor not to take
anythin more till the sprin. Now only twelve hundred rubles was left
of that money, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the
loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of oin back on his
word. With a sinkin heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thouht, "Now
then, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap and
drive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will
certainly never touch a card aain." At that moment his home life, jokes
with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet with his
father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rose
before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it seemed as
if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, lon past. He could not
conceive that a stupid chance, lettin the seven be dealt to the riht
rather than to the left, miht deprive him of all this happiness, newly
appreciated and newly illumined, and plune him into the depths of
unknown and undefined misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with a
sinkin heart the movement of Dolokhov's hands. Those broad, reddish
hands, with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid down
the pack and took up a lass and a pipe that were handed him.

"So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and as if
about to tell a ood story he put down the cards, leaned back in his
chair, and bean deliberately with a smile:

"Yes, entlemen, I've been told there's a rumor oin about Moscow that
I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."

"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.

"Oh, those Moscow ossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up the cards with
a smile.

"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed liftin both hands to his head. The seven
he needed was lyin uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had lost
more than he could pay.

"Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side lance at Rostov
as he continued to deal.




CHAPTER XIV

An hour and a half later most of the players were but little interested
in their own play.

The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteen
hundred rubles he had a lon column of fiures scored aainst him, which
he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vauely
supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it already
exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no loner listenin to
stories or tellin them, but followed every movement of Rostov's hands
and occasionally ran his eyes over the score aainst him. He had decided
to play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He had fixed on
that number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya's joint
aes. Rostov, leanin his head on both hands, sat at the table which was
scrawled over with fiures, wet with spilled wine, and littered with
cards. One tormentin impression did not leave him: that those broad-
boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt
sleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power.

"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winnin it back's
impossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double or
quits... it can't be!... And why is he doin this to me?" Rostov
pondered. Sometimes he staked a lare sum, but Dolokhov refused to
accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and at
one moment prayed to od as he had done on the battlefield at the bride
over the Enns, and then uessed that the card that came first to hand
from the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted the
cords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried stakin the
total of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the other
players, or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to read
what was passin in his mind.

"He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can't want my ruin.
Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his fault.
What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my fault either,"
he thouht to himself, "I have done nothin wron. Have I killed anyone,
or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible misfortune?
And when did it bein? Such a little while ao I came to this table with
the thouht of winnin a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma's
name day and then oin home. I was so happy, so free, so lihthearted!
And I did not realize how happy I was! When did that end and when did
this new, terrible state of thins bein? What marked the chane? I sat
all the time in this same place at this table, chose and placed cards,
and watched those broad-boned aile hands in the same way. When did it
happen and what has happened? I am well and stron and still the same
and in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it will all end in
nothin!"

He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, thouh the room was not hot.
His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless
efforts to seem calm.

The score aainst him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.
Rostov had just prepared a card, by bendin the corner of which he meant
to double the three thousand just put down to his score, when Dolokhov,
slammin down the pack of cards, put it aside and bean rapidly addin
up the total of Rostov's debt, breakin the chalk as he marked the
fiures in his clear, bold hand.

"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the ypsies!"

Some swarthy men and women were really enterin from the cold outside
and sayin somethin in their ypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it
was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:

"Well, won't you o on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it were
the fun of the ame which interested him most.

"It's all up! I'm lost!" thouht he. "Now a bullet throuh my brain--
that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a cheerful
voice:

"Come now, just this one more little card!"

"All riht!" said Dolokhov, havin finished the addition. "All riht!
Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointin to the fiure twenty-one by which
the total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand; and takin up
a pack he prepared to deal. Rostov submissively unbent the corner of his
card and, instead of the six thousand he had intended, carefully wrote
twenty-one.

"It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see whether you will
let me win this ten, or beat it."

Dolokhov bean to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostov detested at that moment
those hands with their short reddish finers and hairy wrists, which
held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.

"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretchin
himself he rose from the table. "One does et tired sittin so lon," he
added.

"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.

Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him to
jest.

"When am I to receive the money, Count?"

Rostov, flushin, drew Dolokhov into the next room.

"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said.

"I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smilin and lookin Nicholas
straiht in the eyes, "you know the sayin, 'Lucky in love, unlucky at
cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."

"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power," thouht
Rostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and mother
by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to escape it
all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from all this
shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with a
mouse.

"Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him.

"My cousin has nothin to do with this and it's not necessary to mention
her!" he exclaimed fiercely.

"Then when am I to have it?"

"Tomorrow," replied Rostov and left the room.




CHAPTER XV

To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dinified tone was not difficult, but to
o home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, confess and
ask for money he had no riht to after ivin his word of honor, was
terrible.

At home, they had not yet one to bed. The youn people, after returnin
from the theater, had had supper and were rouped round the clavichord.
As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere
of love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now after
Dolokhov's proposal and Ioel's ball, seemed to have rown thicker round
Sonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sonya and
Natasha, in the liht-blue dresses they had worn at the theater, lookin
pretty and conscious of it, were standin by the clavichord, happy and
smilin. Vera was playin chess with Shinshin in the drawin room. The
old countess, waitin for the return of her husband and son, sat playin
patience with the old entlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov,
with sparklin eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord strikin
chords with his short finers, his les thrown back and his eyes rollin
as he san, with his small, husky, but true voice, some verses called
"Enchantress," which he had composed, and to which he was tryin to fit
music:


Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre What maic power is this recalls
me still? What spark has set my inmost soul on fire, What is this bliss
that makes my finers thrill?

He was sinin in passionate tones, azin with his sparklin black-
aate eyes at the frihtened and happy Natasha.

"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she said,
without noticin Nicholas.

"Everythin's still the same with them," thouht Nicholas, lancin into
the drawin room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady.

"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, runnin up to him.

"Is Papa at home?" he asked.

"I am so lad you've come!" said Natasha, without answerin him. "We are
enjoyin ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is stayin a day loner for my sake!
Did you know?"

"No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.

"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess from
the drawin room.

Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sittin down silently at her
table bean to watch her hands arranin the cards. From the dancin
room, they still heard the lauhter and merry voices tryin to persuade
Natasha to sin.

"All wiht! All wiht!" shouted Denisov. "It's no ood makin excuses
now! It's your turn to sin the ba'cawolla--I entweat you!"

The countess lanced at her silent son.

"What is the matter?" she asked.

"Oh, nothin," said he, as if weary of bein continually asked the same
question. "Will Papa be back soon?"

"I expect so."

"Everythin's the same with them. They know nothin about it! Where am I
to o?" thouht Nicholas, and went aain into the dancin room where the
clavichord stood.

Sonya was sittin at the clavichord, playin the prelude to Denisov's
favorite barcarolle. Natasha was preparin to sin. Denisov was lookin
at her with enraptured eyes.

Nicholas bean pacin up and down the room.

"Why do they want to make her sin? How can she sin? There's nothin to
be happy about!" thouht he.

Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude.

"My od, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet throuh my brain is
the only thin left me--not sinin!" his thouhts ran on. "o away? But
where to? It's one--let them sin!"

He continued to pace the room, lookin loomily at Denisov and the irls
and avoidin their eyes.

"Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed to
ask. She noticed at once that somethin had happened to him.

Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, with her quick instinct, had
instantly noticed her brother's condition. But, thouh she noticed it,
she was herself in such hih spirits at that moment, so far from sorrow,
sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself as youn
people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by
sympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to herself: "No,
I must be mistaken, he must be feelin happy, just as I am."

"Now, Sonya!" she said, oin to the very middle of the room, where she
considered the resonance was best.

Havin lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
dancers do, Natasha, risin eneretically from her heels to her toes,
stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.

"Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answerin the rapt aze with which
Denisov followed her.

"And what is she so pleased about?" thouht Nicholas, lookin at his
sister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"

Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose, her
eyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of her
surroundins, and from her smilin lips flowed sounds which anyone may
produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill
you and make you weep.

Natasha, that winter, had for the first time beun to sin seriously,
mainly because Denisov so delihted in her sinin. She no loner san
as a child, there was no loner in her sinin that comical, childish,
painstakin effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sin
well, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: "It is not trained,
but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained." Only they enerally
said this some time after she had finished sinin. While that untrained
voice, with its incorrect breathin and labored transitions, was
soundin, even the connoisseurs said nothin, but only delihted in it
and wished to hear it aain. In her voice there was a virinal
freshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained
velvety softness, which so minled with her lack of art in sinin that
it seemed as if nothin in that voice could be altered without spoilin
it.

"What is this?" thouht Nicholas, listenin to her with widely opened
eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is sinin today!" And suddenly
the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note, the
next phrase, and everythin in the world was divided into three beats:
"Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one, two, three...
One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... One. "Oh, this
senseless life of ours!" thouht Nicholas. "All this misery, and money,
and Dolokhov, and aner, and honor--it's all nonsense... but this is
real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest! Now then, darlin! How
will she take that si? She's taken it! Thank od!" And without noticin
that he was sinin, to strenthen the si he sun a second, a third
below the hih note. "Ah, od! How fine! Did I really take it? How
fortunate!" he thouht.

Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was somethin that was finest
in Rostov's soul! And this somethin was apart from everythin else in
the world and above everythin in the world. "What were losses, and
Dolokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One miht kill and rob
and yet be happy..."




CHAPTER XVI

It was lon since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did
that day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than reality
aain presented itself. He ot up without sayin a word and went
downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old count
came in from his club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearin him
drive up, went to meet him.

"Well--had a ood time?" said the old count, smilin aily and proudly
at his son.

Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst into
sobs. The count was lihtin his pipe and did not notice his son's
condition.

"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thouht Nicholas, for the first and last
time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel ashamed
of himself, he said, as if merely askin his father to let him have the
carriae to drive to town:

"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forettin. I
need some money."

"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially ood humor. "I told
you it would not be enouh. How much?"

"Very much," said Nicholas flushin, and with a stupid careless smile,
for which he was lon unable to forive himself, "I have lost a little,
I mean a ood deal, a reat deal--forty three thousand."

"What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddenin with
an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.

"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.

"Well!..." said the old count, spreadin out his arms and sinkin
helplessly on the sofa.

"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a bold,
free, and easy tone, while in his soul he rearded himself as a
worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. He
loned to kiss his father's hands and kneel to be his foriveness, but
said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!

The old count cast down his eyes on hearin his son's words and bean
bustlinly searchin for somethin.

"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult to
raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"

And with a furtive lance at his son's face, the count went out of the
room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all
expected this.

"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbin, "forive me!" And seizin
his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.

While father and son were havin their explanation, the mother and
dauhter were havin one not less important. Natasha came runnin to her
mother, quite excited.

"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."

"Made what?"

"Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed.

The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? To
this chit of a irl, Natasha, who not so lon ao was playin with dolls
and who was still havin lessons.

"Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hopin it was a joke.

"Nonsense, indeed! I am tellin you the fact," said Natasha indinantly.
"I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"

The countess shrued her shoulders.

"If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell him
he is a fool, that's all!"

"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indinantly and seriously.

"Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. Well, if you
are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a lauh of annoyance.
"ood luck to you!"

"No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in love with
him."

"Well then, tell him so."

"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?"

"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to o and tell him?" said
the countess smilin.

"No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It's all very well
for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should have seen
how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came out
accidently."

"Well, all the same, you must refuse him."

"No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's so nice."

"Well then, accept his offer. It's hih time for you to be married,"
answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.

"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say it."

"And there's nothin for you to say. I shall speak to him myself," said
the countess, indinant that they should have dared to treat this little
Natasha as rown up.

"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen at
the door," and Natasha ran across the drawin room to the dancin hall,
where Denisov was sittin on the same chair by the clavichord with his
face in his hands.

He jumped up at the sound of her liht step.

"Nataly," he said, movin with rapid steps toward her, "decide my fate.
It is in your hands."

"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are so nice...
but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I shall always love you."

Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strane sounds she did not
understand. She kissed his rouh curly black head. At this instant, they
heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She came up to them.

"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an
embarrassed voice, thouh it sounded severe to Denisov--"but my dauhter
is so youn, and I thouht that, as my son's friend, you would have
addressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not have oblied
me to ive this refusal."

"Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a uilty face. He
tried to say more, but faltered.

Natasha could not remain calm, seein him in such a pliht. She bean to
sob aloud.

"Countess, I have done w'on," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice,
"but believe me, I so adore your dauhter and all your family that I
would ive my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, and seein
her severe face said: "Well, ood-by, Countess," and kissin her hand,
he left the room with quick resolute strides, without lookin at
Natasha.

Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He did not wish to stay another day in
Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends ave him a farewell entertainment
at the ypsies', with the result that he had no recollection of how he
was put in the sleih or of the first three staes of his journey.

After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortniht in Moscow,
without oin out of the house, waitin for the money his father could
not at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the irls' room.

Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if she
wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her
love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of
her.

He filled the irls' albums with verses and music, and havin at last
sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his
receipt, he left at the end of November, without takin leave of any of
his acquaintances, to overtake his reiment which was already in Poland.

BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07




CHAPTER I

After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersbur. At the
Torzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmaster
would not supply them. Pierre was oblied to wait. Without undressin,
he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his bi
feet in their overboots on the table, and bean to reflect.

"Will you have the portmanteaus brouht in? And a bed ot ready, and
tea?" asked his valet.

Pierre ave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anythin. He had
beun to think of the last station and was still ponderin on the same
question--one so important that he took no notice of what went on around
him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he ot to Petersbur
earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this station,
but compared to the thouhts that now occupied him it was a matter of
indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest
of his life.

The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman sellin Torzhok
embroidery came into the room offerin their services. Without chanin
his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable
to understand what they wanted or how they could o on livin without
havin solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had been enrossed
by the same thouhts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after
the duel and had spent that first aonizin, sleepless niht. But now,
in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with special force. No
matter what he thouht about, he always returned to these same questions
which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself. It was
as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life toether were
stripped, so that the screw could not et in or out, but went on turnin
uselessly in the same place.

The postmaster came in and bean obsequiously to be his excellency to
wait only two hours, when, come what miht, he would let his excellency
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lyin and only wanted
to et more money from the traveler.

"Is this ood or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is ood for me, bad for
another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he needs
money for food; the man said an officer had once iven him a thrashin
for lettin a private traveler have the courier horses. But the officer
thrashed him because he had to et on as quickly as possible. And I,"
continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured,
and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and a
year later they executed those who executed him--also for some reason.
What is bad? What is ood? What should one love and what hate? What does
one live for? And what am I? What is life, and what is death? What power
overns all?"

There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that not
a loical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was: "You'll
die and all will end. You'll die and know all, or cease askin." But
dyin was also dreadful.

The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whinin voice, went on offerin her
wares, especially a pair of oatskin slippers. "I have hundreds of
rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tattered
cloak lookin timidly at me," he thouht. "And what does she want the
money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness or
peace of mind. Can anythin in the world make her or me less a prey to
evil and death?--death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow--
at any rate, in an instant as compared with eternity." And aain he
twisted the screw with the stripped thread, and aain it turned
uselessly in the same place.

His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, by
Madame de Souza. He bean readin about the sufferins and virtuous
strules of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist her
seducer when she loved him?" he thouht. "od could not have put into
her heart an impulse that was aainst His will. My wife--as she once
was--did not strule, and perhaps she was riht. Nothin has been found
out, nothin discovered," Pierre aain said to himself. "All we can know
is that we know nothin. And that's the heiht of human wisdom."

Everythin within and around him seemed confused, senseless, and
repellent. Yet in this very repunance to all his circumstances Pierre
found a kind of tantalizin satisfaction.

"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this
entleman," said the postmaster, enterin the room followed by another
traveler, also detained for lack of horses.

The newcomer was a short, lare-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old man,
with ray bushy eyebrows overhanin briht eyes of an indefinite
rayish color.

Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that
had been ot ready for him, lancin now and then at the newcomer, who,
with a loomy and tired face, was wearily takin off his wraps with the
aid of his servant, and not lookin at Pierre. With a pair of felt boots
on his thin bony les, and keepin on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskin
coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his bi head with
its broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov. The
stern, shrewd, and penetratin expression of that look struck Pierre. He
felt a wish to speak to the straner, but by the time he had made up his
mind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed his
eyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finer of one of
them Pierre noticed a lare cast iron rin with a seal representin a
death's head. The straner sat without stirrin, either restin or, as
it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servant
was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,
evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never rown.
This active old servant was unpackin the traveler's canteen and
preparin tea. He brouht in a boilin samovar. When everythin was
ready, the straner opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled a
tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom
he passed it. Pierre bean to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the need,
even the inevitability, of enterin into conversation with this
straner.

The servant brouht back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an
unfinished bit of nibbled suar, and asked if anythin more would be
wanted.


* To indicate he did not want more tea.

"No. ive me the book," said the straner.

The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,
and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All at
once the straner closed the book, puttin in a marker, and aain,
leanin with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his former
position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time to
turn away when the old man, openin his eyes, fixed his steady and
severe aze straiht on Pierre's face.

Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the briht old
eyes attracted him irresistibly.




CHAPTER II

"I have the pleasure of addressin Count Bezukhov, if I am not
mistaken," said the straner in a deliberate and loud voice.

Pierre looked silently and inquirinly at him over his spectacles.

"I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued the straner, "and of your
misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say--"Yes,
misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you in
Moscow was a misfortune."--"I reret it very much, my dear sir."

Pierre flushed and, hurriedly puttin his les down from the bed, bent
forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile.

"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but for
reater reasons."

He paused, his aze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by way
of invitin the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant
to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submittin to him
involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.

"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the straner continued. "You are youn
and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my power."

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very rateful to you.
Where are you travelin from?"

The straner's face was not enial, it was even cold and severe, but in
spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance were
irresistibly attractive to Pierre.

"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the old
man, "say so, my dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected and
tenderly paternal way.

"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very lad to make your
acquaintance," said Pierre. And aain, lancin at the straner's hands,
he looked more closely at the rin, with its skull--a masonic sin.

"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"

"Yes, I belon to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the straner,
lookin deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their name and my
own I hold out a brotherly hand to you."

"I am afraid," said Pierre, smilin, and waverin between the confidence
the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit of
ridiculin the masonic beliefs--"I am afraid I am very far from
understandin--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of lookin at the
world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another."

"I know your outlook," said the Mason, "and the view of life you
mention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,
is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruit
of pride, indolence, and inorance. Forive me, my dear sir, but if I
had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a
rerettable delusion."

"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faint
smile.

"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
"No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by layin stone on stone
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of enerations from our
forefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be a
worthy dwellin place of the reat od," he added, and closed his eyes.

"I ouht to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in od,"
said Pierre, reretfully and with an effort, feelin it essential to
speak the whole truth.

The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
millions in hand miht smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.

"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannot
know Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy."

"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?"

"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You do not
know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in thee,
and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!" pronounced
the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.

He paused and sihed, evidently tryin to calm himself.

"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be speakin of
Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speakin? Whom hast thou
denied?" he suddenly asked with exultin austerity and authority in his
voice. "Who invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence came thy
conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Bein? didst
thou, and why did the whole world, conceive the idea of the existence of
such an incomprehensible Bein, a Bein all-powerful, eternal, and
infinite in all His attributes?..."

He stopped and remained silent for a lon time.

Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.

"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason bean aain,
lookin not at Pierre but straiht before him, and turnin the leaves of
his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep
still. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could brin
him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But how
can I, an insinificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity, and
all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may not
see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and
sinfulness?" He paused aain. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest that thou art
wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words," he went on,
with a somber and scornful smile. "And thou art more foolish and
unreasonable than a little child, who, playin with the parts of a
skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand its
use, he does not believe in the master who made it. To know Him is
hard.... For aes, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to
attain that knowlede and are still infinitely far from our aim; but in
our lack of understandin we see only our weakness and His
reatness...."

Pierre listened with swellin heart, azin into the Mason's face with
shinin eyes, not interruptin or questionin him, but believin with
his whole soul what the straner said. Whether he accepted the wise
reasonin contained in the Mason's words, or believed as a child
believes, in the speaker's tone of conviction and earnestness, or the
tremor of the speaker's voice--which sometimes almost broke--or those
brilliant aed eyes rown old in this conviction, or the calm firmness
and certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole bein (and
which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection and
hopelessness)--at any rate, Pierre loned with his whole soul to believe
and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort, reeneration,
and return to life.

"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the Mason.

"I do not understand," said Pierre, feelin with dismay doubts
reawakenin. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in
the Mason's aruments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him. "I
don't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man cannot
attain the knowlede of which you speak."

The Mason smiled with his entle fatherly smile.

"The hihest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to
imbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel
and jude of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself can I
retain in some deree of purity the liquid I receive."

"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.

"The hihest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldly
sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into which
intellectual knowlede is divided. The hihest wisdom is one. The
hihest wisdom has but one science--the science of the whole--the
science explainin the whole creation and man's place in it. To receive
that science it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self, and
so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to perfect one's
self. And to attain this end, we have the liht called conscience that
od has implanted in our souls."

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and ask
thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attained
relyin on reason only? What art thou? You are youn, you are rich, you
are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these
ood ifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"

"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincin.

"Thou hatest it. Then chane it, purify thyself; and as thou art
purified, thou wilt ain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. How
have you spent it? In riotous ories and debauchery, receivin
everythin from society and ivin nothin in return. You have become
the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done for
your neihbor? Have you ever thouht of your tens of thousands of
slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You have
profited by their toil to lead a profliate life. That is what you have
done. Have you chosen a post in which you miht be of service to your
neihbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, my
dear sir--took on yourself responsibility for the uidance of a youn
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and
misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not know
od and hate your life. There is nothin strane in that, my dear sir!"

After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his lon discourse, aain
leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre
looked at that aed, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved
his lips without utterin a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle,
vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.

The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
servant.

"How about the horses?" he asked, without lookin at Pierre.

"The exchane horses have just come," answered the servant. "Will you
not rest here?"

"No, tell them to harness."

"Can he really be oin away leavin me alone without havin told me
all, and without promisin to help me?" thouht Pierre, risin with
downcast head; and he bean to pace the room, lancin occasionally at
the Mason. "Yes, I never thouht of it, but I have led a contemptible
and profliate life, thouh I did not like it and did not want to,"
thouht Pierre. "But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,
could disclose it to me."

Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
traveler, havin packed his thins with his practiced hands, bean
fastenin his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, and
said in a tone of indifferent politeness:

"Where are you oin to now, my dear sir?"

"I?... I'm oin to Petersbur," answered Pierre, in a childlike,
hesitatin voice. "I thank you. I aree with all you have said. But do
not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is I,
above all, who am to blame for everythin. Help me, teach me, and
perhaps I may..."

Pierre could not o on. He ulped and turned away.

The Mason remained silent for a lon time, evidently considerin.

"Help comes from od alone," he said, "but such measure of help as our
Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are oin to
Petersbur. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook and
wrote a few words on a lare sheet of paper folded in four). "Allow me
to ive you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital, first of all
devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your
former way of life. And now I wish you a ood journey, my dear sir," he
added, seein that his servant had entered... "and success."

The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from the
postmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and
Martinists, even in Novikov's time. For a lon while after he had one,
Pierre did not o to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room,
ponderin over his vicious past, and with a rapturous sense of beinnin
anew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable, virtuous future
that seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him that he had been vicious
only because he had somehow forotten how ood it is to be virtuous. Not
a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed in
the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of
supportin one another in the path of virtue, and that is how
Freemasonry presented itself to him.




CHAPTER III

On reachin Petersbur Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival, he
went nowhere and spent whole days in readin Thomas a Kempis, whose book
had been sent him by someone unknown. One thin he continually realized
as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believin in
the possibility of attainin perfection, and in the possibility of
active brotherly love amon men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to
him. A week after his arrival, the youn Polish count, Willarski, whom
Pierre had known slihtly in Petersbur society, came into his room one
evenin in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov's
second had called on him, and, havin closed the door behind him and
satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room, addressed
Pierre.

"I have come to you with a messae and an offer, Count," he said without
sittin down. "A person of very hih standin in our Brotherhood has
made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual
term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I consider it a sacred
duty to fulfill that person's wishes. Do you wish to enter the
Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"

The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met
at balls, amiably smilin in the society of the most brilliant women,
surprised Pierre.

"Yes, I do wish it," said he.

Willarski bowed his head.

"One more question, Count," he said, "which I be you to answer in all
sincerity--not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have you
renounced your former convictions--do you believe in od?"

Pierre considered.

"Yes... yes, I believe in od," he said.

"In that case..." bean Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.

"Yes, I do believe in od," he repeated.

"In that case we can o," said Willarski. "My carriae is at your
service."

Willarski was silent throuhout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as to
what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
tell the truth.

Havin entered the courtyard of a lare house where the Lode had its
headquarters, and havin ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small
well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of a
servant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strane
attire appeared at the door. Willarski, steppin toward him, said
somethin to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
wardrobe in which Pierre noticed arments such as he had never seen
before. Havin taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound
Pierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catchin some hairs
painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, and
takin him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurt
Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.
His hue fiure, with arms hanin down and with a puckered, thouh
smilin face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.

Havin led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.

"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully if
you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre nodded
affirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
your eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courae and success," and,
pressin Pierre's hand, he went out.

Left alone, Pierre went on smilin in the same way. Once or twice he
shrued his shoulders and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if
wishin to take it off, but let it drop aain. The five minutes spent
with his eyes bandaed seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his
les almost ave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. He
experienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid of what
would happen to him and still more afraid of showin his fear. He felt
curious to know what was oin to happen and what would be revealed to
him; but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment had come when he
would at last start on that path of reeneration and on the actively
virtuous life of which he had been dreamin since he met Joseph
Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pierre took the bandae
off his eyes and lanced around him. The room was in black darkness,
only a small lamp was burnin inside somethin white. Pierre went nearer
and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book.
The book was the ospel, and the white thin with the lamp inside was a
human skull with its cavities and teeth. After readin the first words
of the ospel: "In the beinnin was the Word and the Word was with
od," Pierre went round the table and saw a lare open box filled with
somethin. It was a coffin with bones inside. He was not at all
surprised by what he saw. Hopin to enter on an entirely new life quite
unlike the old one, he expected everythin to be unusual, even more
unusual than what he was seein. A skull, a coffin, the ospel--it
seemed to him that he had expected all this and even more. Tryin to
stimulate his emotions he looked around. "od, death, love, the
brotherhood of man," he kept sayin to himself, associatin these words
with vaue yet joyful ideas. The door opened and someone came in.

By the dim liht, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he saw
a rather short man. Havin evidently come from the liht into the
darkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the
table and placed on it his small leather-loved hands.

This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and
part of his les; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a hih
white ruffle, outlinin his rather lon face which was lit up from
below.

"For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turnin in Pierre's
direction at a sliht rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, who do
not believe in the truth of the liht and who have not seen the liht,
come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlihtenment?"

At the moment the door opened and the straner came in, Pierre felt a
sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at
confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete
straner, yet nearer to him throuh the brotherhood of man. With bated
breath and beatin heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by which name the
brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was
known). Drawin nearer, he reconized in the Rhetor a man he knew,
Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an
acquaintance--he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.
For a lon time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had to
repeat his question.

"Yes... I... I... desire reeneration," Pierre uttered with difficulty.

"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any idea
of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim?"
said he quietly and quickly.

"I... hope... for uidance... help... in reeneration," said Pierre,
with a tremblin voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his
excitement and to bein unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
Russian.

"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"

"I imaine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who
have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feelin ashamed of the inadequacy of
his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. "I imaine..."

"ood!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this answer.
"Have you souht for means of attainin your aim in reliion?"

"No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," said Pierre, so
softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was
sayin. "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre.

"You are seekin for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,
therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhetor,
after a moment's pause.

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his loved hands on his breast,
and bean to speak.

"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said, "and
if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood with
profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on which
it rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation and
handin on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which has come
down to us from the remotest aes, even from the first man--a mystery on
which perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this mystery is of
such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by
lon and dilient self-purification, not everyone can hope to attain it
quickly. Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparin our members as
much as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and enlihten their
minds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have striven
to attain this mystery, and thereby to render them capable of receivin
it.

"By purifyin and reeneratin our members we try, thirdly, to improve
the whole human race, offerin it in our members an example of piety and
virtue, and thereby try with all our miht to combat the evil which
sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you aain."

"To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and a
mental imae of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.
He imained men such as he had himself been a fortniht ao, and he
addressed an edifyin exhortation to them. He imained to himself
vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,
imained oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three objects
mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improvin mankind,
especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the
Rhetor, thouh it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,
and the second aim, that of purifyin and reeneratin himself, did not
much interest him because at that moment he felt with deliht that he
was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all
that was ood.

Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the
seven virtues, correspondin to the seven steps of Solomon's temple,
which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were:
1. Discretion, the keepin of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to
those of hiher ranks in the Order. 3. Morality. 4. Love of mankind. 5.
Courae. 6. enerosity. 7. The love of death.

"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thouht of death," the
Rhetor said, "to brin yourself to reard it not as a dreaded foe, but
as a friend that frees the soul rown weary in the labors of virtue from
this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and
peace."

"Yes, that must be so," thouht Pierre, when after these words the
Rhetor went away, leavin him to solitary meditation. "It must be so,
but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meanin of which is only
now radually openin before me." But five of the other virtues which
Pierre recalled, countin them on his finers, he felt already in his
soul: courae, enerosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially
obedience--which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He now
felt so lad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will
to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forot what the seventh
virtue was and could not recall it.

The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre
whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to
all that would be required of him.

"I am ready for everythin," said Pierre.

"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Order delivers its
teachin not in words only but also by other means, which may perhaps
have a stroner effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom and virtue
than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein should already
have suested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words could
do. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like method
of enlihtenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies that
explained their teachin by hierolyphics. A hierolyph," said the
Rhetor, "is an emblem of somethin not conizable by the senses but
which possesses qualities resemblin those of the symbol."

Pierre knew very well what a hierolyph was, but dared not speak. He
listened to the Rhetor in silence, feelin from all he said that his
ordeal was about to bein.

"If you are resolved, I must bein your initiation," said the Rhetor
comin closer to Pierre. "In token of enerosity I ask you to ive me
all your valuables."

"But I have nothin here," replied Pierre, supposin that he was asked
to ive up all he possessed.

"What you have with you: watch, money, rins...."

Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manae for
some time to et the weddin rin off his fat finer. When that had been
done, the Rhetor said:

"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."

Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot accordin to the
Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's left
breast, and stoopin down pulled up the left le of his trousers to
above the knee. Pierre hurriedly bean takin off his riht boot also
and was oin to tuck up the other trouser le to save this straner the
trouble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and ave him a
slipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,
doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face aainst his will,
Pierre stood with his arms hanin down and les apart, before his
brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.

"And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chief
passion," said the latter.

"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.

"That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path
of virtue," said the Mason.

Pierre paused, seekin a reply.

"Wine? luttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Aner? Women?" He
went over his vices in his mind, not knowin to which of them to ive
the pre-eminence.

"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.

The Mason did not move and for a lon time said nothin after this
answer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, takin the kerchief that lay
on the table, aain bound his eyes.

"For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon yourself,
put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but in
your own heart. The source of blessedness is not without us but
within...."

Pierre had already lon been feelin in himself that refreshin source
of blessedness which now flooded his heart with lad emotion.




CHAPTER IV

Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not
the Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he reconized by his
voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre
replied: "Yes, yes, I aree," and with a beamin, childlike smile, his
fat chest uncovered, steppin unevenly and timidly in one slippered and
one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his bare
chest. He was conducted from that room alon passaes that turned
backwards and forwards and was at last brouht to the doors of the
Lode. Willarski couhed, he was answered by the masonic knock with
mallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was still
blindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he was
born, and so on. Then he was aain led somewhere still blindfolded, and
as they went alon he was told alleories of the toils of his
pilrimae, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the
universe, and of the courae with which he should endure toils and
daners. Durin these wanderins, Pierre noticed that he was spoken of
now as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now as the "Postulant,"
to the accompaniment of various knockins with mallets and swords. As he
was bein led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty
amon his conductors. He heard those around him disputin in whispers
and one of them insistin that he should be led alon a certain carpet.
After that they took his riht hand, placed it on somethin, and told
him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand
and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the
laws of the Order. The candles were then extinuished and some spirit
lihted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would now
see the lesser liht. The bandae was taken off his eyes and, by the
faint liht of the burnin spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw several
men standin before him, wearin aprons like the Rhetor's and holdin
swords in their hands pointed at his breast. Amon them stood a man
whose white shirt was stained with blood. On seein this, Pierre moved
forward with his breast toward the swords, meanin them to pierce it.
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded
aain.

"Now thou hast seen the lesser liht," uttered a voice. Then the candles
were relit and he was told that he would see the full liht; the bandae
was aain removed and more than ten voices said toether: "Sic transit
loria mundi."

Pierre radually bean to recover himself and looked about at the room
and at the people in it. Round a lon table covered with black sat some
twelve men in arments like those he had already seen. Some of them
Pierre had met in Petersbur society. In the President's chair sat a
youn man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanin from his neck.
On his riht sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna's
two years before. There were also present a very distinuished dinitary
and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kurains'. All maintained
a solemn silence, listenin to the words of the President, who held a
mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was a star-shaped liht. At one
side of the table was a small carpet with various fiures worked upon
it, at the other was somethin resemblin an altar on which lay a
Testament and a skull. Round it stood seven lare candlesticks like
those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar,
placed his feet at riht anles, and bade him lie down, sayin that he
must prostrate himself at the ates of the Temple.

"He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.

"Oh, hush, please!" said another.

Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsihted eyes without
obeyin, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am I
doin? Aren't they lauhin at me? Shan't I be ashamed to remember
this?" But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre lanced at the
serious faces of those around, remembered all he had already one
throuh, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was ahast at
his hesitation and, tryin to arouse his former devotional feelin,
prostrated himself before the ates of the Temple. And really, the
feelin of devotion returned to him even more stronly than before. When
he had lain there some time, he was told to et up, and a white leather
apron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was iven a trowel
and three pairs of loves, and then the rand Master addressed him. He
told him that he should try to do nothin to stain the whiteness of that
apron, which symbolized strenth and purity; then of the unexplained
trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice,
and indulently to smooth with it the heart of his neihbor. As to the
first pair of loves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not know their
meanin but must keep them. The second pair of man's loves he was to
wear at the meetins, and finally of the third, a pair of women's
loves, he said: "Dear brother, these woman's loves are intended for
you too. ive them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all. This
ift will be a plede of your purity of heart to her whom you select to
be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a pause, he added: "But
beware, dear brother, that these loves do not deck hands that are
unclean." While the rand Master said these last words it seemed to
Pierre that he rew embarrassed. Pierre himself rew still more
confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, bean
lookin about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.

This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to the
ru and bean readin to him from a manuscript book an explanation of
all the fiures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a
trowel, a rouh stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, and
so on. Then a place was assined to Pierre, he was shown the sins of
the Lode, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down. The
rand Master bean readin the statutes. They were very lon, and
Pierre, from joy, aitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to
understand what was bein read. He manaed to follow only the last words
of the statutes and these remained in his mind.

"In our temples we reconize no other distinctions," read the rand
Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of makin any
distinctions which may infrine equality. Fly to a brother's aid whoever
he may be, exhort him who oeth astray, raise him that falleth, never
bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thy
neihbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss. Forive thy
enemy, do not avene thyself except by doin him ood. Thus fulfillin
the hihest law thou shalt reain traces of the ancient dinity which
thou hast lost."

He finished and, ettin up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tears
of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowin how to answer the
conratulations and reetins from acquaintances that met him on all
sides. He acknowleded no acquaintances but saw in all these men only
brothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.

The rand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down in
their places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of
humility.

The rand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed, and
the distinuished dinitary who bore the title of "Collector of Alms"
went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to subscribe all
he had, but fearin that it miht look like pride subscribed the same
amount as the others.

The meetin was at an end, and on reachin home Pierre felt as if he had
returned from a lon journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had
become completely chaned, and had quite left behind his former habits
and way of life.




CHAPTER V

The day after he had been received into the Lode, Pierre was sittin at
home readin a book and tryin to fathom the sinificance of the Square,
one side of which symbolized od, another moral thins, a third physical
thins, and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then his
attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in
imaination a new plan of life. On the previous evenin at the Lode, he
had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it
would be wiser for him to leave Petersbur. Pierre proposed oin to his
estates in the south and there attendin to the welfare of his serfs. He
was joyfully plannin this new life, when Prince Vasili suddenly entered
the room.

"My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you
quarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said Prince
Vasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell you
positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was before
the Jews."

Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him.

"And why didn't you simply come straiht to me as to a friend? I know
all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved as becomes a
man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't o into
that. But consider the position in which you are placin her and me in
the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added, lowerin his
voice. "She is livin in Moscow and you are here. Remember, dear boy,"
and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply a misunderstandin. I
expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her a letter at once, and
she'll come here and all will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let me
tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it."

Prince Vasili ave Pierre a sinificant look.

"I know from reliable sources that the Dowaer Empress is takin a keen
interest in the whole affair. You know she is very racious to Helene."

Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasili did
not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to bein to speak
in the tone of decided refusal and disareement in which he had firmly
resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the masonic
statutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him. He blinked, went
red, ot up and sat down aain, strulin with himself to do what was
for him the most difficult thin in life--to say an unpleasant thin to
a man's face, to say what the other, whoever he miht be, did not
expect. He was so used to submittin to Prince Vasili's tone of careless
self-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now, but
he also felt that on what he said now his future depended--whether he
would follow the same old road, or that new path so attractively shown
him by the Masons, on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a
new life.

"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'll
write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."

But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,
without lookin at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like his
father, muttered in a whisper:

"Prince, I did not ask you here. o, please o!" And he jumped up and
opened the door for him.

"o!" he repeated, amazed at himself and lad to see the look of
confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.

"What's the matter with you? Are you ill?"

"o!" the quiverin voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to o without
receivin any explanation.

A week later, Pierre, havin taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
and leavin lare sums of money with them for alms, went away to his
estates. His new brethren ave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons
and promised to write to him and uide him in his new activity.




CHAPTER VI

The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of the
Emperor's severity reardin duels at that time, neither the principals
nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel, confirmed
by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of society. Pierre who
had been rearded with patronizin condescension when he was an
illeitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best match in
Russia, had sunk reatly in the esteem of society after his marriae--
when the marriaeable dauhters and their mothers had nothin to hope
from him--especially as he did not know how, and did not wish, to court
society's favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had happened, he was
said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits of
bloodthirsty rae. And when after Pierre's departure Helene returned to
Petersbur, she was received by all her acquaintances not only
cordially, but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune.
When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dinified
expression, which with characteristic tact she had acquired thouh she
did not understand its sinificance. This expression suested that she
had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplaininly and that her husband
was a cross laid upon her by od. Prince Vasili expressed his opinion
more openly. He shrued his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and,
pointin to his forehead, remarked:

"A bit touched--I always said so."

"I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referrin to Pierre, "I
said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her priority)
"that that senseless youn man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of
these days. I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures
about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if you
remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees. And how has
it ended? I was aainst this marriae even then and foretold all that
has happened."

Anna Pavlovna continued to ive on free evenins the same kind of
soirees as before--such as she alone had the ift of arranin--at which
was to be found "the cream of really ood society, the bloom of the
intellectual essence of Petersbur," as she herself put it. Besides this
refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions were also
distinuished by the fact that she always presented some new and
interestin person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state
of the political thermometer of leitimate Petersbur court society so
dearly and distinctly indicated.

Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon's
destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender
of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our troops
had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon was
beinnin, Anna Pavlovna ave one of her soirees. The "cream of really
ood society" consisted of the fascinatin Helene, forsaken by her
husband, Mortemart, the delihtful Prince Hippolyte who had just
returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a youn man
referred to in that drawin room as "a man of reat merit" (un homme de
beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, and
several other less noteworthy persons.

The novelty Anna Pavlovna was settin before her uests that evenin was
Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messener from the
Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personae.

The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that
evenin was this:

"Whatever the European sovereins and commanders may do to countenance
Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in eneral, annoyance and
mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not cease
to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to the
Kin of Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as voulu,
eore Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"

When Boris, who was to be served up to the uests, entered the drawin
room, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, uided
by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and
the hope of an alliance with her.

Boris, rown more manly and lookin fresh, rosy and self-possessed,
entered the drawin room eleantly dressed in the uniform of an aide-de-
camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and then
brouht back to the eneral circle.

Anna Pavlovna ave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to
several persons whom he did not know, ivin him a whispered description
of each.

"Prince Hippolyte Kurain, M. Kru, the chare d'affaires from
Copenhaen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr. Shitov--a man of
reat merit"--this of the man usually so described.

Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the
peculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had manaed durin his
service to place himself very advantaeously. He was aide-de-camp to a
very important personae, had been sent on a very important mission to
Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messener. He had
become thorouhly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had
been so pleased at Olmutz and accordin to which an ensin miht rank
incomparably hiher than a eneral, and accordin to which what was
needed for success in the service was not effort or work, or courae, or
perseverance, but only the knowlede of how to et on with those who can
rant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his
success and at the inability of others to understand these thins. In
consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all his
relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were
completely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last roat to
be better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of many
pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipae or appear
in the streets of Petersbur in an old uniform. He made friends with and
souht the acquaintance of only those above him in position and who
could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersbur and despised
Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish love
for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the
Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna
Pavlovna's drawin room he considered an important step up in the
service, and he at once understood his role, lettin his hostess make
use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scanned
each face, appraisin the possibilities of establishin intimacy with
each of those present, and the advantaes that miht accrue. He took the
seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the eneral
conversation.

"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that
not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, and
she doubts the means we have of ainin them. That is the actual phrase
used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish chare d'affaires.

"The doubt is flatterin," said "the man of profound intellect," with a
subtle smile.

"We must distinuish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of
Austria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never have thouht
of such a thin, it is only the cabinet that says it."

"Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" (for some reason
she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined French
pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversin with a
Frenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere." *


* "Europe will never be our sincere ally."

After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courae and firmness of the Kin
of Prussia, in order to draw Boris into the conversation.

Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaitin his turn,
but manaed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neihbor, the
beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the handsome
youn aide-de-camp with a smile.

Speakin of the position of Prussia, Anna Pavlovna very naturally asked
Boris to tell them about his journey to loau and in what state he
found the Prussian army. Boris, speakin with deliberation, told them in
pure, correct French many interestin details about the armies and the
court, carefully abstainin from expressin an opinion of his own about
the facts he was recountin. For some time he enrossed the eneral
attention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was
received with pleasure by all her visitors. The reatest attention of
all to Boris' narrative was shown by Helene. She asked him several
questions about his journey and seemed reatly interested in the state
of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to him with
her usual smile.

"You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone that implied
that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was
absolutely necessary.

"On Tuesday between eiht and nine. It will ive me reat pleasure."

Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to bein a conversation
with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her
aunt wished to hear him.

"You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closin her eyes
and indicatin Helene with a sorrowful esture. "Ah, she is such an
unfortunate and charmin woman! Don't mention him before her--please
don't! It is too painful for her!"




CHAPTER VII

When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had
the ear of the company.

Bendin forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" and havin
said this lauhed. Everyone turned toward him.

"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interroatively, aain lauhin, and
then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pavlovna waited
for him to o on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she
bean to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the
sword of Frederick the reat.

"It is the sword of Frederick the reat which I..." she bean, but
Hippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." and
aain, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said no
more.

Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressed him
firmly.

"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"

Hippolyte lauhed as if ashamed of lauhin.

"Oh, it's nothin. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat a joke
he had heard in Vienna and which he had been tryin all that evenin to
et in) "I only wished to say that we are wron to fiht pour le Roi de
Prusse!"

Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it miht be taken as ironical or
appreciative accordin to the way the joke was received. Everybody
lauhed.

"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,
shakin her little shriveled finer at him.

"We are not fihtin pour le Roi de Prusse, but for riht principles.
Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.

The conversation did not fla all evenin and turned chiefly on the
political news. It became particularly animated toward the end of the
evenin when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned.

"You know N-- N-- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?" said
"the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S-- S-- et the same
distinction?"

"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward but not a
distinction," said the diplomatist--"a ift, rather."

"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenber."

"It's impossible," replied another.

"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."

When everybody rose to o, Helene who had spoken very little all the
evenin aain turned to Boris, askin him in a tone of caressin
sinificant command to come to her on Tuesday.

"It is of reat importance to me," she said, turnin with a smile toward
Anna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which she
spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.

It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evenin about the
Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him. She
seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on
Tuesday.

But on Tuesday evenin, havin come to Helene's splendid salon, Boris
received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to
come. There were other uests and the countess talked little to him, and
only as he kissed her hand on takin leave said unexpectedly and in a
whisper, with a stranely unsmilin face: "Come to dinner tomorrow... in
the evenin. You must come.... Come!"

Durin that stay in Petersbur, Boris became an intimate in the
countess' house.




CHAPTER VIII

The war was flamin up and nearin the Russian frontier. Everywhere one
heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militiamen and
recruits were bein enrolled in the villaes, and from the seat of war
came contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously
interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, and
Princess Mary had reatly chaned since 1805.

In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eiht commanders in chief
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throuhout Russia.
Despite the weakness of ae, which had become particularly noticeable
since the time when he thouht his son had been killed, he did not think
it riht to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor
himself, and this fresh opportunity for action ave him new enery and
strenth. He was continually travelin throuh the three provinces
entrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties, severe
to cruel with his subordinates, and went into everythin down to the
minutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased takin lessons in
mathematics from her father, and when the old prince was at home went to
his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his
randfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary
spent most of the day in the nursery, takin a mother's place to her
little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
passionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself
to ive her friend the pleasure of dandlin the little anel--as she
called her nephew--and playin with him.

Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the
tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument
brouht from Italy, representin an anel with outspread wins ready to
fly upwards. The anel's upper lip was slihtly raised as thouh about
to smile, and once on comin out of the chapel Prince Andrew and
Princess Mary admitted to one another that the anel's face reminded
them stranely of the little princess. But what was still straner,
thouh of this Prince Andrew said nothin to his sister, was that in the
expression the sculptor had happened to ive the anel's face, Prince
Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead
wife: "Ah, why have you done this to me?"

Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him a
lare estate, Boucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.
Partly because of the depressin memories associated with Bald Hills,
partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearin with
his father's peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,
Prince Andrew made use of Boucharovo, bean buildin and spent most of
his time there.

After the Austerlitz campain Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to
continue his military service, and when the war recommenced and
everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in the
recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son
seemed to have chaned roles since the campain of 1805. The old man,
roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campain,
while Prince Andrew on the contrary, takin no part in the war and
secretly rerettin this, saw only the dark side.

On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual durin his father's
absence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who
had driven the old prince to town returned brinin papers and letters
for Prince Andrew.

Not findin the youn prince in his study the valet went with the
letters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there. He
was told that the prince had one to the nursery.

"If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brouht some papers," said
one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sittin on a child's
little chair while, frownin and with tremblin hands, he poured drops
from a medicine bottle into a winelass half full of water.

"What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand shakin unintentionally, he
poured too many drops into the lass. He threw the mixture onto the
floor and asked for some more water. The maid brouht it.

There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a table,
a child's table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was
sittin. The curtains were drawn, and a sinle candle was burnin on the
table, screened by a bound music book so that the liht did not fall on
the cot.

"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressin her brother from beside the
cot where she was standin, "better wait a bit... later..."

"Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep puttin thins off--
and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an exasperated
whisper, evidently meanin to wound his sister.

"My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep," said
the princess in a tone of entreaty.

Prince Andrew ot up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, winelass
in hand.

"Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," he said hesitatin.

"As you please... really... I think so... but as you please," said
Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had
prevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid who was callin
him in a whisper.

It was the second niht that neither of them had slept, watchin the boy
who was in a hih fever. These last days, mistrustin their household
doctor and expectin another for whom they had sent to town, they had
been tryin first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness
and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and
reproached and disputed with each other.

"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the maid.

Prince Andrew went out.

"Devil take them!" he muttered, and after listenin to the verbal
instructions his father had sent and takin the correspondence and his
father's letter, he returned to the nursery.

"Well?" he asked.

"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says that
sleep is more important than anythin," whispered Princess Mary with a
sih.

Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burnin hot.

"Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the lass with the drops
and aain went up to the cot.

"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.

But he scowled at her anrily thouh also with sufferin in his eyes,
and stooped lass in hand over the infant.

"But I wish it," he said. "I be you--ive it him!"

Princess Mary shrued her shoulders but took the lass submissively and
callin the nurse bean ivin the medicine. The child screamed
hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutchin his head, went out and sat
down on a sofa in the next room.

He still had all the letters in his hand. Openin them mechanically he
bean readin. The old prince, now and then usin abbreviations, wrote
in his lare elonated hand on blue paper as follows:

Have just this moment received by special messener very joyful news--if
it's not false. Bennisen seems to have obtained a complete victory over
Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersbur everyone is rejoicin, and the
rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Thouh he is a erman--I
conratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Korchevo--a
certain Khandrikov--is up to; till now the additional men and provisions
have not arrived. allop off to him at once and say I'll have his head
off if everythin is not here in a week. Have received another letter
about the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka--he took part in it--and
it's all true. When mischief-makers don't meddle even a erman beats
Buonaparte. He is said to be fleein in reat disorder. Mind you allop
off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!

Prince Andrew sihed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was a
closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it up
without readin it and reread his father's letter, endin with the
words: "allop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions!"

"No, pardon me, I won't o now till the child is better," thouht he,
oin to the door and lookin into the nursery.

Princess Mary was still standin by the cot, ently rockin the baby.

"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thouht Prince
Andrew, recallin his father's letter. "Yes, we have ained a victory
over Bonaparte, just when I'm not servin. Yes, yes, he's always pokin
fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he bean readin Bilibin's letter
which was written in French. He read without understandin half of it,
read only to foret, if but for a moment, what he had too lon been
thinkin of so painfully to the exclusion of all else.




CHAPTER IX

Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and
thouh he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms, he
described the whole campain with a fearless self-censure and self-
derision enuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obliation of
diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince
Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he
had accumulated at the siht of all that was bein done in the army. The
letter was old, havin been written before the battle at Preussisch-
Eylau.

"Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin,
"as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I have
certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me; what
I have seen durin these last three months is incredible.

"I bein ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks the
Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed
us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but it turns out
that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our fine speeches and
in his rude and savae way throws himself on the Prussians without
ivin them time to finish the parade they had beun, and in two twists
of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the
palace at Potsdam.

"'I most ardently desire,' writes the Kin of Prussia to Bonaparte,
'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a
manner areeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, I
have hastened to take all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' The
Prussian enerals pride themselves on bein polite to the French and lay
down their arms at the first demand.

"The head of the arrison at loau, with ten thousand men, asks the
Kin of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All
this is absolutely true.

"In short, hopin to settle matters by takin up a warlike attitude, it
turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in war
on our own frontiers, with and for the Kin of Prussia. We have
everythin in perfect order, only one little thin is lackin, namely, a
commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz success
miht have been more decisive had the commander-in-chief not been so
youn, all our octoenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski and
Kamenski the latter was preferred. The eneral comes to us, Suvorov-
like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy and
triumph.

"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersbur. The mails are
taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everythin
himself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant
for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed to
him. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal rows
impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor to
Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild
furies and raes at everyone and everythin, seizes the letters, opens
them, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. 'Ah! So
that's the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep
an eye on me! Very well then! et alon with you!' So he writes the
famous order of the day to eneral Bennisen:

'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army.
You have brouht your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here it is exposed,
and without fuel or forae, so somethin must be done, and, as you
yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must think of
retreatin to our frontier--which do today.'

"'From all my ridin,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have ot a saddle
sore which, comin after all my previous journeys, quite prevents my
ridin and commandin so vast an army, so I have passed on the command
to the eneral next in seniority, Count Buxhowden, havin sent him my
whole staff and all that belons to it, advisin him if there is a lack
of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only one
day's ration of bread remains, and in some reiments none at all, as
reported by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmoretzki, and all
that the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in
hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In reard to which I humbly
submit my report, with the information that if the army remains in its
present bivouac another fortniht there will not be a healthy man left
in it by sprin.

"'rant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already
in any case dishonored by bein unable to fulfill the reat and lorious
task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most racious
permission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a
secretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the army
does not produce the slihtest stir--a blind man has left it. There are
thousands such as I in Russia.'

"The field marshal is anry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,
isn't it loical?

"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasinly
interestin and entertainin. After the field marshal's departure it
appears that we are within siht of the enemy and must ive battle.
Buxhowden is commander-in-chief by seniority, but eneral Bennisen does
not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who are
within siht of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity to
fiht a battle 'on his own hand' as the ermans say. He does so. This is
the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a reat victory but in my
opinion was nothin of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have a very
bad way of decidin whether a battle was won or lost. Those who retreat
after a battle have lost it is what we say; and accordin to that it is
we who lost the battle of Pultusk. In short, we retreat after the battle
but send a courier to Petersbur with news of a victory, and eneral
Bennisen, hopin to receive from Petersbur the post of commander in
chief as a reward for his victory, does not ive up the command of the
army to eneral Buxhowden. Durin this interrenum we bein a very
oriinal and interestin series of maneuvers. Our aim is no loner, as
it should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid eneral
Buxhowden who by riht of seniority should be our chief. So
eneretically do we pursue this aim that after crossin an unfordable
river we burn the brides to separate ourselves from our enemy, who at
the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. eneral Buxhowden was all but
attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of
these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues us--we
scuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to
the other. At last our enemy, Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. Both
enerals are anry, and the result is a challene on Buxhowden's part
and an epileptic fit on Bennisen's. But at the critical moment the
courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersbur
returns brinin our appointment as commander-in-chief, and our first
foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; we can now turn our thouhts to the
second, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at that moment a third
enemy rises before us--namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly
demandin bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are
empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox bein lootin, and in a way of
which our last campain can ive you no idea. Half the reiments form
bands and scour the countryside and put everythin to fire and sword.
The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with sick,
and famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack our
headquarters, and the commander-in-chief has to ask for a battalion to
disperse them. Durin one of these attacks they carried off my empty
portmanteau and my dressin own. The Emperor proposes to ive all
commanders of divisions the riht to shoot marauders, but I much fear
this will oblie one half the army to shoot the other."

At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while, in
spite of himself (althouh he knew how far it was safe to trust
Bilibin), what he had read bean to interest him more and more. When he
had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away. It was
not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out
there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,
rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he had
read, and listened to what was passin in the nursery. Suddenly he
thouht he heard a strane noise throuh the door. He was seized with
alarm lest somethin should have happened to the child while he was
readin the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.

Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hidin somethin from him
with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no loner by the cot.

"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairin whisper behind
him.

As often happens after lon sleeplessness and lon anxiety, he was
seized by an unreasonin panic--it occurred to him that the child was
dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.

"All is over," he thouht, and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead.
He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty and
that the nurse had been hidin the dead baby. He drew the curtain aside
and for some time his frihtened, restless eyes could not find the baby.
At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the
bed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smackin his lips in
his sleep and breathin evenly.

Prince Andrew was as lad to find the boy like that, as if he had
already lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had tauht him,
tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The soft
forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; even
the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He was not dead,
but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrew
loned to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, azin at his
head and at the little arms and les which showed under the blanket. He
heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of the
cot. He did not look round, but still azin at the infant's face
listened to his reular breathin. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,
who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain, and
dropped it aain behind her. Prince Andrew reconized her without
lookin and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.

"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew.

"I was comin to tell you so."

The child moved slihtly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead
aainst the pillow.

Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her
luminous eyes shone more brihtly than usual from the tears of joy that
were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slihtly
catchin the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warnin esture
and stood still in the dim liht beneath the curtain as if not wishin
to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the
world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, rufflin his hair
aainst the muslin of the curtain.

"Yes, this is the one thin left me now," he said with a sih.




CHAPTER X

Soon after his admission to the masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the
Kiev province, where he had the reatest number of serfs, takin with
him full directions which he had written down for his own uidance as to
what he should do on his estates.

When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office and
explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that steps
would be taken immediately to free his serfs--and that till then they
were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursin their babies
were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be iven to the serfs,
punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,
asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some of
the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen amon them) listened with
alarm, supposin these words to mean that the youn count was displeased
with their manaement and embezzlement of money, some after their first
friht were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words they had not heard
before, others simply enjoyed hearin how the master talked, while the
cleverest amon them, includin the chief steward, understood from this
speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.

The chief steward expressed reat sympathy with Pierre's intentions, but
remarked that besides these chanes it would be necessary to o into the
eneral state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.

Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into an
income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him an
allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of the
followin budet:

About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about
30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,
and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was iven in
pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent to
the countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The buildin of a
new church, previously beun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last
two years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was
spent, and almost every year he was oblied to borrow. Besides this the
chief steward wrote every year tellin him of fires and bad harvests, or
of the necessity of rebuildin factories and workshops. So the first
task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or
inclination--practical business.

He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But he
felt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that these
consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with
them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the state
of thins to him in the very worst liht, pointin out the necessity of
payin off the debts and undertakin new activities with serf labor, to
which Pierre did not aree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that
steps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by
showin the necessity of first payin off the loans from the Land Bank,
and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.

The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suested sellin
the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the river,
and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of which
operations accordin to him were connected with such complicated
measures--the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so on--
that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:

"Yes, yes, do so."

Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him
to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried
to pretend to the steward that he was attendin to it. The steward for
his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these
consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to
himself.

In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and straners hastened to make
his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the larest
landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre's reatest weakness--
the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the Lode--were so
stron that he could not resist them. Aain whole days, weeks, and
months of his life passed in as reat a rush and were as much occupied
with evenin parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, ivin him no time
for reflection, as in Petersbur. Instead of the new life he had hoped
to lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundins.

Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral
life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two--morality and the love
of death. He consoled himself with the thouht that he fulfilled another
of the precepts--that of reformin the human race--and had other
virtues--love of his neihbor, and especially enerosity.

In the sprin of 1807 he decided to return to Petersbur. On the way he
intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders
had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom od had
entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.

The chief steward, who considered the youn count's attempts almost
insane--unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs--made
some concessions. Continuin to represent the liberation of the serfs as
impracticable, he arraned for the erection of lare buildins--schools,
hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates before the master arrived.
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes (which he
knew Pierre would not like), but for just such ratefully reliious
ones, with offerins of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality, as,
accordin to his understandin of his master, would touch and delude
him.

The southern sprin, the comfortable rapid travelin in a Vienna
carriae, and the solitude of the road, all had a laddenin effect on
Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque
than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thrivin and touchinly
rateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,
which thouh they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feelin in the
depth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with bread
and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, askin permission,
as a mark of their ratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,
to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor of
Peter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women with
infants in arms met him to thank him for releasin them from hard work.
On a third estate the priest, bearin a cross, came to meet him
surrounded by children whom, by the count's enerosity, he was
instructin in readin, writin, and reliion. On all his estates Pierre
saw with his own eyes brick buildins erected or in course of erection,
all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon
to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, accordin to
which the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the
touchin thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue
coats.

What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him
with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and
Paul was a market villae where a fair was held on St. Peter's day, and
that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had beun the
chantry lon before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in that
villaes were in a state of the reatest poverty. He did not know that
since the nursin mothers were no loner sent to work on his land, they
did still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priest
who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, and
that the pupils' parents wept at havin to let him take their children
and secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that the
brick buildins, built to plan, were bein built by serfs whose manorial
labor was thus increased, thouh lessened on paper. He did not know that
where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs' payments
had been diminished by a third, their obliatory manorial work had been
increased by a half. And so Pierre was delihted with his visit to his
estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left
Petersbur, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"
as he called the rand Master.

"How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much ood,"
thouht Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"

He was pleased at the ratitude he received, but felt abashed at
receivin it. This ratitude reminded him of how much more he miht do
for these simple, kindly people.

The chief steward, a very stupid but cunnin man who saw perfectly
throuh the naive and intellient count and played with him as with a
toy, seein the effect these prearraned receptions had on Pierre,
pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all
the uselessness of freein the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.

Pierre in his secret soul areed with the steward that it would be
difficult to imaine happier people, and that od only knew what would
happen to them when they were free, but he insisted, thouh reluctantly,
on what he thouht riht. The steward promised to do all in his power to
carry out the count's wishes, seein clearly that not only would the
count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for
the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,
but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the
newly erected buildins were standin empty and that the serfs continued
to ive in money and work all that other people's serfs ave--that is to
say, all that could be ot out of them.




CHAPTER XI

Returnin from his journey throuh South Russia in the happiest state of
mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had lon had of visitin his
friend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.

Boucharovo lay in a flat uninterestin part of the country amon fields
and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The house lay
behind a newly du pond filled with water to the brink and with banks
still bare of rass. It was at the end of a villae that stretched alon
the hihroad in the midst of a youn copse in which were a few fir
trees.

The homestead consisted of a threshin floor, outhouses, stables, a
bathhouse, a lode, and a lare brick house with semicircular facade
still in course of construction. Round the house was a arden newly laid
out. The fences and ates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a water
cart, painted reen, stood in a shed; the paths were straiht, the
brides were stron and had handrails. Everythin bore an impress of
tidiness and ood manaement. Some domestic serfs Pierre met, in reply
to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newly
built lode close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked after Prince
Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriae, said that the
prince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.

Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small thouh clean house after
the brilliant surroundins in which he had last met his friend in
Petersbur.

He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered
wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have one farther, but Anton
ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.

"Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice.

"A visitor," answered Anton.

"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair bein pushed back.

Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to face
with Prince Andrew, who came out frownin and lookin old. Pierre
embraced him and liftin his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek
and looked at him closely.

"Well, I did not expect you, I am very lad," said Prince Andrew.

Pierre said nothin; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. He
was struck by the chane in him. His words were kindly and there was a
smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in
spite of his evident wish to do so he could not ive them a joyous and
lad sparkle. Prince Andrew had rown thinner, paler, and more manly-
lookin, but what amazed and estraned Pierre till he ot used to it
were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicatin proloned
concentration on some one thouht.

As is usually the case with people meetin after a proloned separation,
it was lon before their conversation could settle on anythin. They put
questions and ave brief replies about thins they knew ouht to be
talked over at lenth. At last the conversation radually settled on
some of the topics at first lihtly touched on: their past life, plans
for the future, Pierre's journeys and occupations, the war, and so on.
The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his
friend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with
which he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful
animation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would
have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was sayin, but could not. The
latter bean to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his
enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or oodness, in Prince
Andrew's presence. He was ashamed to express his new masonic views,
which had been particularly revived and strenthened by his late tour.
He checked himself, fearin to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible
desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite
different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersbur.

"I can't tell you how much I have lived throuh since then. I hardly
know myself aain."

"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince Andrew.

"Well, and you? What are your plans?"

"Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said, as if
astonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm buildin. I mean to settle
here altoether next year...."

Pierre looked silently and searchinly into Prince Andrew's face, which
had rown much older.

"No, I meant to ask..." Pierre bean, but Prince Andrew interrupted him.

"But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels and
all you have been doin on your estates."

Pierre bean describin what he had done on his estates, tryin as far
as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been
made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of what he had
been doin, as thouh it were all an old-time story, and he listened not
only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was tellin
him.

Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company and
at last became silent.

"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidently
also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am only
bivouackin here and have just come to look round. I am oin back to my
sister today. I will introduce you to her. But of course you know her
already," he said, evidently tryin to entertain a visitor with whom he
now found nothin in common. "We will o after dinner. And would you now
like to look round my place?"

They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talkin of the political
news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other
intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of
the new homestead he was constructin and its buildins, but even here,
while on the scaffoldin, in the midst of a talk explainin the future
arranements of the house, he interrupted himself:

"However, this is not at all interestin. Let us have dinner, and then
we'll set off."

At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriae.

"I was very much surprised when I heard of it," said Prince Andrew.

Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and said
hurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you know
it is all over, and forever."

"Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothin's forever."

"But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"

"And so you had to o throuh that too!"

"One thin I thank od for is that I did not kill that man," said
Pierre.

"Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicious do is a very ood
thin really."

"No, to kill a man is bad--wron."

"Why is it wron?" ured Prince Andrew. "It is not iven to man to know
what is riht and what is wron. Men always did and always will err, and
in nothin more than in what they consider riht and wron."

"What does harm to another is wron," said Pierre, feelin with pleasure
that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, had
beun to talk, and wanted to express what had brouht him to his present
state.

"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.

"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for ourselves."

"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is
somethin I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, rowin more
and more animated and evidently wishin to express his new outlook to
Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very real evils in life:
remorse and illness. The only ood is the absence of those evils. To
live for myself avoidin those two evils is my whole philosophy now."

"And love of one's neihbor, and self-sacrifice?" bean Pierre. "No, I
can't aree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to have
to repent is not enouh. I lived like that, I lived for myself and
ruined my life. And only now when I am livin, or at least tryin"
(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others, only
now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shall not aree
with you, and you do not really believe what you are sayin." Prince
Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.

"When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll et on with her," he
said. "Perhaps you are riht for yourself," he added after a short
pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for yourself and
say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you bean
livin for others. I experienced just the reverse. I lived for lory.--
And after all what is lory? The same love of others, a desire to do
somethin for them, a desire for their approval.--So I lived for others,
and not almost, but quite, ruined my life. And I have become calmer
since I bean to live only for myself."

"But what do you mean by livin only for yourself?" asked Pierre,
rowin excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"

"But that's just the same as myself--they are not others," explained
Prince Andrew. "The others, one's neihbors, le prochain, as you and
Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and evil. Le
prochain--your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do ood."

And he looked at Pierre with a mockin, challenin expression. He
evidently wished to draw him on.

"You are jokin," replied Pierre, rowin more and more excited. "What
error or evil can there be in my wishin to do ood, and even doin a
little--thouh I did very little and did it very badly? What evil can
there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves,
were rowin up and dyin with no idea of od and truth beyond
ceremonies and meaninless prayers and are now instructed in a
comfortin belief in future life, retribution, recompense, and
consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dyin
of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be
rendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum
for the aed? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable ood if a
peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or niht and I ive
them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurryin and lispin. "And I have
done that thouh badly and to a small extent; but I have done somethin
toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a ood action, and
more than that, you can't make me believe that you do not think so
yourself. And the main thin is," he continued, "that I know, and know
for certain, that the enjoyment of doin this ood is the only sure
happiness in life."

"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," said
Prince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a arden, and you build
hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what's
riht and what's ood must be juded by one who knows all, but not by
us. Well, you want an arument," he added, "come on then."

They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served
as a veranda.

"Come, let's arue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," he
went on, crookin a finer, "education and so forth; that is, you want
to raise him" (pointin to a peasant who passed by them takin off his
cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs, while
it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible, and
that is just what you want to deprive him of. I envy him, but you want
to make him what I am, without ivin him my means. Then you say,
'lihten his toil.' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential to
him, as much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to you
or me. You can't help thinkin. I o to bed after two in the mornin,
thouhts come and I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I
think and can't help thinkin, just as he can't help plowin and mowin;
if he didn't, he would o to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could
not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, so
he could not stand my physical idleness, but would row fat and die. The
third thin--what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrew
crooked a third finer. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit, he
is dyin, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will dra
about as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. It
would be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are bein born
and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different if you
ruded losin a laborer--that's how I reard him--but you want to cure
him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides, what a
notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he,
frownin anrily and turnin away from Pierre.

Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was
evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spoke
readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a lon time. His
lance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.

"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand how
one can live with such ideas. I had such moments myself not lon ao, in
Moscow and when travelin, but at such times I collapsed so that I don't
live at all--everythin seems hateful to me... myself most of all. Then
I don't eat, don't wash... and how is it with you?..."

"Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew; "on the
contrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'm
alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I can
without hurtin others."

"But with such ideas what motive have you for livin? One would sit
without movin, undertakin nothin...."

"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do nothin,
but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to
choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to et out of it.
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications
for it--the kind of ood-natured, fussy shallowness necessary for the
position. Then there's this house, which must be built in order to have
a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And now there's this
recruitin."

"Why aren't you servin in the army?"

"After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew loomily. "No, thank you very
much! I have promised myself not to serve aain in the active Russian
army. And I won't--not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk
threatenin Bald Hills--even then I wouldn't serve in the Russian army!
Well, as I was sayin," he continued, recoverin his composure, "now
there's this recruitin. My father is chief in command of the Third
District, and my only way of avoidin active service is to serve under
him."

"Then you are servin?"

"I am."

He paused a little while.

"And why do you serve?"

"Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of
his time. But he is rowin old, and thouh not exactly cruel he has too
eneretic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is
terrible, and now he has this authority of a commander-in-chief of the
recruitin, ranted by the Emperor. If I had been two hours late a
fortniht ao he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yukhnovna
haned," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So I am servin because I
alone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him
from actions which would torment him afterwards."

"Well, there you see!"

"Yes, but it is not as you imaine," Prince Andrew continued. "I did
not, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who
had stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been very
lad to see him haned, but I was sorry for my father--that aain is for
myself."

Prince Andrew rew more and more animated. His eyes littered feverishly
while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no
desire to do ood to his neihbor.

"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is a
very ood thin, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had anyone
floed or sent to Siberia--and still less for your serfs. If they are
beaten, floed, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the
worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes on
their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is a ood thin
for proprietors who perish morally, brin remorse upon themselves,
stifle this remorse and row callous, as a result of bein able to
inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I pity, and
for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You may not have
seen, but I have seen, how ood men brouht up in those traditions of
unlimited power, in time when they row more irritable, become cruel and
harsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain themselves and row more
and more miserable."

Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinkin
that these thouhts had been suested to Prince Andrew by his father's
case.

He did not reply.

"So that's what I'm sorry for--human dinity, peace of mind, purity, and
not the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you may,
always remain the same backs and foreheads."

"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never aree with you," said
Pierre.




CHAPTER XII

In the evenin Andrew and Pierre ot into the open carriae and drove to
Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, lancin at Pierre, broke the silence now and
then with remarks which showed that he was in a ood temper.

Pointin to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was makin in
his husbandry.

Pierre remained loomily silent, answerin in monosyllables and
apparently immersed in his own thouhts.

He was thinkin that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had one astray, did not
see the true liht, and that he, Pierre, ouht to aid, enlihten, and
raise him. But as soon as he thouht of what he should say, he felt that
Prince Andrew with one word, one arument, would upset all his teachin,
and he shrank from beinnin, afraid of exposin to possible ridicule
what to him was precious and sacred.

"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly bean, lowerin his head
and lookin like a bull about to chare, "why do you think so? You
should not think so."

"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.

"About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thouht like
that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile.
Freemasonry is not a reliious ceremonial sect, as I thouht it was:
Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal, aspects of
humanity."

And he bean to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teachin of Christianity freed
from the bonds of State and Church, a teachin of equality, brotherhood,
and love.

"Only our holy brotherhood has the real meanin of life, all the rest is
a dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, that outside this
union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I aree with you that
nothin is left for an intellient and ood man but to live out his
life, like you, merely tryin not to harm others. But make our
fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood, ive yourself up
to us, let yourself be uided, and you will at once feel yourself, as I
have felt myself, a part of that vast invisible chain the beinnin of
which is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.

Prince Andrew, lookin straiht in front of him, listened in silence to
Pierre's words. More than once, when the noise of the wheels prevented
his catchin what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by the
peculiar low that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his silence,
Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would
not interrupt him or lauh at what he said.

They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to
cross by ferry. While the carriae and horses were bein placed on it,
they also stepped on the raft.

Prince Andrew, leanin his arms on the raft railin, azed silently at
the floodin waters litterin in the settin sun.

"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are you silent?"

"What do I think about it? I am listenin to you. It's all very well....
You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life, the
destiny of man, and the laws which overn the world. But who are we?
Men. How is it you know everythin? Why do I alone not see what you see?
You see a rein of oodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it."

Pierre interrupted him.

"Do you believe in a future life?" he asked.

"A future life?" Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, ivin him no time
to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as he knew
Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions.

"You say you can't see a rein of oodness and truth on earth. Nor could
I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end of
everythin. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed to the
fields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the universe,
in the whole universe there is a kindom of truth, and we who are now
the children of earth are--eternally--children of the whole universe.
Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole?
Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, between the lower and
hiher beins, in this vast harmonious multitude of beins in whom the
Deity--the Supreme Power if you prefer the term--is manifest? If I see,
clearly see, that ladder leadin from plant to man, why should I suppose
it breaks off at me and does not o farther and farther? I feel that I
cannot vanish, since nothin vanishes in this world, but that I shall
always exist and always have existed. I feel that beyond me and above me
there are spirits, and that in this world there is truth."

"Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is not that
which can convince me, dear friend--life and death are what convince.
What convinces is when one sees a bein dear to one, bound up with one's
own life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it riht"
(Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away), "and suddenly that
bein is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to exist.... Why? It
cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there is.... That's
what convinces, that is what has convinced me," said Prince Andrew.

"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm sayin?"

"No. All I say is that it is not arument that convinces me of the
necessity of a future life, but this: when you o hand in hand with
someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, and
you yourself are left facin that abyss, and look in. And I have looked
in...."

"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a
Someone? There is the future life. The Someone is--od."

Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriae and horses had lon since been
taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk half
below the horizon and an evenin frost was starrin the puddles near the
ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of the footmen,
coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked.

"If there is a od and future life, there is truth and ood, and man's
hihest happiness consists in strivin to attain them. We must live, we
must love, and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap
of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in the Whole,"
said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.

Prince Andrew stood leanin on the railin of the raft listenin to
Pierre, and he azed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the
sun leamin on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness. Pierre
became silent. The raft had lon since stopped and only the waves of the
current beat softly aainst it below. Prince Andrew felt as if the sound
of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whisperin:

"It is true, believe it."

He sihed, and lanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look at
Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superior
friend.

"Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it is time to
et on," he added, and, steppin off the raft, he looked up at the sky
to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz saw
that hih, everlastin sky he had seen while lyin on that battlefield;
and somethin that had lon been slumberin, somethin that was best
within him, suddenly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul. It
vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his life,
but he knew that this feelin which he did not know how to develop
existed within him. His meetin with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince
Andrew's life. Thouh outwardly he continued to live in the same old
way, inwardly he bean a new life.




CHAPTER XIII

It was ettin dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front
entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the house,
Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's attention to a commotion oin
on at the back porch. A woman, bent with ae, with a wallet on her back,
and a short, lon-haired, youn man in a black arment had rushed back
to the ate on seein the carriae drivin up. Two women ran out after
them, and all four, lookin round at the carriae, ran in dismay up the
steps of the back porch.

"Those are Mary's 'od's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have mistaken
us for my father. This is the one matter in which she disobeys him. He
orders these pilrims to be driven away, but she receives them."

"But what are 'od's folk'?" asked Pierre.

Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,
and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back
soon.

The old prince had one to the town and was expected back any minute.

Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept
in perfect order and readiness for him in his father's house; he himself
went to the nursery.

"Let us o and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned. "I
have not found her yet, she is hidin now, sittin with her 'od's
folk.' It will serve her riht, she will be confused, but you will see
her 'od's folk.' It's really very curious."

"What are 'od's folk'?" asked Pierre.

"Come, and you'll see for yourself."

Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face
when they went in. In her snu room, with lamps burnin before the icon
stand, a youn lad with a lon nose and lon hair, wearin a monk's
cassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Near them, in an
armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, with a meek expression on
her childlike face.

"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mild reproach,
as she stood before her pilrims like a hen before her chickens.

"Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir," * she said
to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and now
his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above all
his kindly, simple face disposed her favorably toward him. She looked at
him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very
much, but please don't lauh at my people." After exchanin the first
reetins, they sat down.


* "Delihted to see you. I am very lad to see you."

"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, lancin with a
smile at the youn pilrim.

"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, implorinly. "Il faut que vous sachiez que
c'est une femme," * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.

"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" *(2) Princess Mary repeated.


* "You must know that this is a woman."

* (2) "For heaven's sake."

It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilrims
and Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were their
customary lon-established relations on the matter.

"Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous devriez au contraire
m'être reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votre intimité avec
ce jeune homme." *


* "But, my dear, you ouht on the contrary to be rateful to me for
explainin to Pierre your intimacy with this youn man."

"Really?" said Pierre, azin over his spectacles with curiosity and
seriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially rateful to him) into
Ivanushka's face, who, seein that she was bein spoken about, looked
round at them all with crafty eyes.

Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite
unnecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, lowerin
her eyes but castin side lances at the newcomers, had turned her cup
upside down and placed a nibbled bit of suar beside it, and sat quietly
in her armchair, thouh hopin to be offered another cup of tea.
Ivanushka, sippin out of her saucer, looked with sly womanish eyes from
under her brows at the youn men.

"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.

"I have, ood sir," she answered arrulously. "Just at Christmastime I
was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at the
shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, master, where a reat
and wonderful blessin has been revealed."

"And was Ivanushka with you?"

"I o by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, tryin to speak in a bass
voice. "I only came across Pelaeya in Yukhnovo..."

Pelaeya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tell what
she had seen.

"In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessin has been revealed."

"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew.

"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him, Pelaeya."

"No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he is
one of od's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once ave me ten rubles, I
remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of od's
own and oes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why are you not
oin to the riht place? o to Kolyazin where a wonder-workin icon of
the Holy Mother of od has been revealed.' On hearin those words I said
ood-by to the holy folk and went."

All were silent, only the pilrim woman went on in measured tones,
drawin in her breath.

"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A reat blessin has been
revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the
Holy Virin Mother of od'...."

"All riht, all riht, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary,
flushin.

"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired.

"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brihtness on the face like
the liht of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops and
drops...."

"But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, who had
listened attentively to the pilrim.

"Oh, master, what are you sayin?" exclaimed the horrified Pelaeya,
turnin to Princess Mary for support.

"They impose on the people," he repeated.

"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilrim woman, crossin herself. "Oh,
don't speak so, master! There was a eneral who did not believe, and
said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said it he went blind. And
he dreamed that the Holy Virin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him
and said, 'Believe in me and I will make you whole.' So he beed: 'Take
me to her, take me to her.' It's the real truth I'm tellin you, I saw
it myself. So he was brouht, quite blind, straiht to her, and he oes
up to her and falls down and says, 'Make me whole,' says he, 'and I'll
ive thee what the Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, the
star is fixed into the icon. Well, and what do you think? He received
his siht! It's a sin to speak so. od will punish you," she said
admonishinly, turnin to Pierre.

"How did the star et into the icon?" Pierre asked.

"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of eneral?" said Prince
Andrew, with a smile.

Pelaeya suddenly rew quite pale and clasped her hands.

"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she bean, her
pallor suddenly turnin to a vivid red. "Master, what have you said? od
forive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lord forive him! My dear, what
does it mean?..." she asked, turnin to Princess Mary. She ot up and,
almost cryin, bean to arrane her wallet. She evidently felt
frihtened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such
thins could be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now to
foro the charity of this house.

"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come to
me?..."

"Come, Pelaeya, I was jokin," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma parole, je
n'ai pas voulu l'offenser. * I did not mean anythin, I was only
jokin," he said, smilin shyly and tryin to efface his offense. "It
was all my fault, and Andrew was only jokin."


* "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."

Pelaeya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such a look
of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew lanced so meekly now at her and
now at Pierre, that she was radually reassured.




CHAPTER XIV

The pilrim woman was appeased and, bein encouraed to talk, ave a
lon account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that his
hands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monks
she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, takin
some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with the
saints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then o on to another.
I'd sleep a bit and then aain o and kiss the relics, and there was
such peace all around, such blessedness, that one don't want to come
out, even into the liht of heaven aain."

Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went out
of the room, and then, leavin "od's folk" to finish their tea,
Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawin room.

"You are very kind," she said to him.

"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelins. I understand them so
well and have the reatest respect for them."

Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.

"I have known you a lon time, you see, and am as fond of you as of a
brother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, not
ivin him time to reply to her affectionate words. "I am very anxious
about him. His health was better in the winter, but last sprin his
wound reopened and the doctor said he ouht to o away for a cure. And I
am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has not a character
like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our sorrows. He keeps
it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in ood spirits, but that is
the effect of your visit--he is not often like that. If you could
persuade him to o abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet reular
life is very bad for him. Others don't notice it, but I see it."

Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door, hearin
the bells of the old prince's carriae approachin. Prince Andrew and
Pierre also went out into the porch.

"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticin Pierre as he ot out of the
carriae.

"Ah! Very lad! Kiss me," he said, havin learned who the youn straner
was.

The old prince was in a ood temper and very racious to Pierre.

Before supper, Prince Andrew, comin back to his father's study, found
him disputin hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintainin that a time
would come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed it
chaffinly, but without ettin anry.

"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then there
will be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's nonsense!" he
repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, and
then went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evidently not wishin to
join in the conversation, was lookin over the papers his father had
brouht from town. The old prince went up to him and bean to talk
business.

"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his continent. He came
to town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I ave him a pretty
dinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old prince
went on, addressin his son and pattin Pierre on the shoulder. "A fine
fellow--your friend--I like him! He stirs me up. Another says clever
thins and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubbish yet
stirs an old fellow up. Well, o! et alon! Perhaps I'll come and sit
with you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make friends with my
little fool, Princess Mary," he shouted after Pierre, throuh the door.

Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the
strenth and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm was
not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his family
and with the household. With the stern old prince and the entle, timid
Princess Mary, thouh he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once felt
like an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only Princess
Mary, who had been won by his entleness with the pilrims, ave him her
most radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince Nicholas" (as his
randfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his
arms, and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him
with pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.

The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre's
account. And durin the two days of the youn man's visit he was
extremely kind to him and told him to visit them aain.

When Pierre had one and the members of the household met toether, they
bean to express their opinions of him as people always do after a new
acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anythin but
what was ood of him.




CHAPTER XV

When returnin from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time, how
close was the bond that united him to Denisov and the whole reiment.

On approachin it, Rostov felt as he had done when approachin his home
in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform of
his reiment, when he reconized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picket
ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka leefully shouted to his
master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on his
bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him, and the
officers collected round to reet the new arrival, Rostov experienced
the same feelin as when his mother, his father, and his sister had
embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak.
The reiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and precious as
his parents' house.

When he had reported himself to the commander of the reiment and had
been reassined to his former squadron, had been on duty and had one
out forain, when he had aain entered into all the little interests of
the reiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one
narrow, unchanin frame, he experienced the same sense of peace, of
moral support, and the same sense of bein at home here in his own
place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was none of all
that turmoil of the world at lare, where he did not know his riht
place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonya with whom he ouht,
or ouht not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of oin
there or not oin there; here there were not twenty-four hours in the
day which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not that
innumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or farther
from him than another; there were none of those uncertain and undefined
money relations with his father, and nothin to recall that terrible
loss to Dolokhov. Here, in the reiment, all was clear and simple. The
whole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlorad
reiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no concern of his.
In the reiment, everythin was definite: who was lieutenant, who
captain, who was a ood fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who was
a comrade. The canteenkeeper ave one credit, one's pay came every four
months, there was nothin to think out or decide, you had only to do
nothin that was considered bad in the Pavlorad reiment and, when
iven an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely
ordered--and all would be well.

Havin once more entered into the definite conditions of this reimental
life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lyin down to
rest. Life in the reiment, durin this campain, was all the pleasanter
for him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (for which, in spite of all
his family's efforts to console him, he could not forive himself), he
had made up his mind to atone for his fault by servin, not as he had
done before, but really well, and by bein a perfectly first-rate
comrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man altoether, a thin which
seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the reiment.

After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents
in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved
to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his
parents.

Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk
and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaitin
the Emperor's arrival and the beinnin of a new campain.

The Pavlorad reiment, belonin to that part of the army which had
served in the 1805 campain, had been recruitin up to strenth in
Russia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the
campain. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,
when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campain,
was attached to Platov's division.

Platov's division was actin independently of the main army. Several
times parts of the Pavlorad reiment had exchaned shots with the
enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot's
carriaes. In April the Pavlorads were stationed immovably for some
weeks near a totally ruined and deserted erman villae.

A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,
and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the men
nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could
arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villaes,
searchin for potatoes, but found few even of these.

Everythin had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if any
remained, they were worse than bears and nothin more could be taken
from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enouh, instead of takin
anythin from them, often ave them the last of their rations.

The Pavlorad reiment had had only two men wounded in action, but had
lost nearly half its men from huner and sickness. In the hospitals,
death was so certain that soldiers sufferin from fever, or the swellin
that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able to
dra their les went to the front rather than to the hospitals. When
sprin came on, the soldiers found a plant just showin out of the
round that looked like asparaus, which, for some reason, they called
"Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter, but they wandered about the
fields seekin it and du it out with their sabers and ate it, thouh
they were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That sprin a
new disease broke out amon the soldiers, a swellin of the arms, les,
and face, which the doctors attributed to eatin this root. But in spite
of all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on "Mashka's
sweet root," because it was the second week that the last of the
biscuits were bein doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the
last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.

The horses also had been fed for a fortniht on straw from the thatched
roofs and had become terribly thin, thouh still covered with tufts of
felty winter hair.

Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on livin just
as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, the
hussars formed line for roll call, kept thins in order, roomed their
horses, polished their arms, brouht in straw from the thatched roofs in
place of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which they
rose up hunry, jokin about their nasty food and their huner. As
usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before
them naked; smoked, picked out and baked sproutin rotten potatoes, told
and listened to stories of Potemkin's and Suvorov's campains, or to
leends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Mikolka.

The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless, half-
ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and, in
eneral, food for the men. The youner ones occupied themselves as
before, some playin cards (there was plenty of money, thouh there was
no food), some with more innocent ames, such as quoits and skittles.
The eneral trend of the campain was rarely spoken of, partly because
nothin certain was known about it, partly because there was a vaue
feelin that in the main it was oin badly.

Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlouh they had
become more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov's family,
but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, Rostov felt that
the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a part in
strenthenin their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov
to daner as seldom as possible, and after an action reeted his safe
return with evident joy. On one of his forain expeditions, in a
deserted and ruined villae to which he had come in search of
provisions, Rostov found a family consistin of an old Pole and his
dauhter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hunry, too weak
to et away on foot and had no means of obtainin a conveyance. Rostov
brouht them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodin, and kept
them for some weeks while the old man was recoverin. One of his
comrades, talkin of women, bean chaffin Rostov, sayin that he was
more wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thin if he
introduced to them the pretty Polish irl he had saved. Rostov took the
joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant thins to the
officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel. When the
officer had one away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov's
relations with the Polish irl miht be, bean to upbraid him for his
quickness of temper, and Rostov replied:

"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can't tell you
how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."

Denisov patted him on the shoulder and bean rapidly pacin the room
without lookin at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feelin.

"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticed
tears in his eyes.




CHAPTER XVI

In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival, but
Rostov had no chance of bein present at the review he held at
Bartenstein, as the Pavlorads were at the outposts far beyond that
place.

They were bivouackin. Denisov and Rostov were livin in an earth hut,
du out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. The
hut was made in the followin manner, which had then come into voue. A
trench was du three and a half feet wide, four feet eiht inches deep,
and eiht feet lon. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out and
these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,
in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,
lyin on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On
each side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two
and a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof
was so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trench
and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.
Denisov, who was livin luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron
liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end, with a piece
of (broken but mended) lass in it for a window. When it was very cold,
embers from the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron
on the steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of the
hut--and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were
always some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.

In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One mornin, between seven and
eiht, returnin after a sleepless niht, he sent for embers, chaned
his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, ot warm,
then tidied up the thins on the table and in his own corner, and, his
face lowin from exposure to the wind and with nothin on but his
shirt, lay down on his back, puttin his arms under his head. He was
pleasantly considerin the probability of bein promoted in a few days
for his last reconnoiterin expedition, and was awaitin Denisov, who
had one out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.

Suddenly he heard Denisov shoutin in a vibratin voice behind the hut,
evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was
speakin to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko.

"I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisov was
shoutin. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwouht some fwom
the fields."

"I have iven the order aain and aain, your honor, but they don't
obey," answered the quartermaster.

Rostov lay down aain on his bed and thouht complacently: "Let him fuss
and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lyin down--capitally!" He could
hear that Lavrushka--that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's--was talkin,
as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was sayin somethin about
loaded waons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he had one out for
provisions.

Then Denisov's voice was heard shoutin farther and farther away.
"Saddle! Second platoon!"

"Where are they off to now?" thouht Rostov.

Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddy boots
on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his thins about, took his
leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out aain. In answer to
Rostov's inquiry where he was oin, he answered vauely and crossly
that he had some business.

"Let od and our weat monarch jude me afterwards!" said Denisov oin
out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashin throuh the
mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had one. Havin
ot warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till
toward evenin. Denisov had not yet returned. The weather had cleared
up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playin svayka,
lauhin as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in the
soft mud. Rostov joined them. In the middle of the ame, the officers
saw some waons approachin with fifteen hussars on their skinny horses
behind them. The waons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picket
ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.

"There now, Denisov has been worryin," said Rostov, "and here are the
provisions."

"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be lad!"

A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by two infantry
officers with whom he was talkin.

Rostov went to meet them.

"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man, evidently
very anry, was sayin.

"Haven't I told you I won't ive them up?" replied Denisov.

"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny--seizin the transport of
one's own army. Our men have had nothin to eat for two days."

"And mine have had nothin for two weeks," said Denisov.

"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry officer,
raisin his voice.

"Now, what are you pestewin me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losin his
temper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better not buzz
about here till you et hurt. Be off! o!" he shouted at the officers.

"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not ridin
away. "If you are determined to rob, I'll..."

"o to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and Denisov
turned his horse on the officer.

"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateninly, and turnin
his horse he trotted away, joltin in his saddle.

"A do astwide a fence! A weal do astwide a fence!" shouted Denisov
after him (the most insultin expression a cavalryman can address to a
mounted infantryman) and ridin up to Rostov, he burst out lauhin.

"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said. "After all,
can't let our men starve."

The waons that had reached the hussars had been consined to an
infantry reiment, but learnin from Lavrushka that the transport was
unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. The
soldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared
them with the other squadrons.

The next day the reimental commander sent for Denisov, and holdin his
finers spread out before his eyes said:

"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothin about it and won't
bein proceedins, but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settle
the business there in the commissariat department and if possible sin a
receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as the demand was
booked aainst an infantry reiment, there will be a row and the affair
may end badly."

From the reimental commander's, Denisov rode straiht to the staff with
a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evenin he came back to
his duout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisov
could not speak and asped for breath. When Rostov asked what was the
matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse,
feeble voice.

Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suested that he should undress,
drink some water, and send for the doctor.

"Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but I'll
always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'... Ice..." he
muttered.

The reimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary to
bleed Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm
and only then was he able to relate what had happened to him.

"I et there," bean Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief's
quarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden twenty
miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait. Announce me.'
Vewy well, so out comes their head chief--also took it into his head to
lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'--'Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man who
seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to
fill his own pockets!' 'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy ood!' Then he
says: 'o and ive a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair will
be passed on to headquarters.' I o to the commissioner. I enter, and at
the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it that's
starvin us?" shouted Denisov, hittin the table with the fist of his
newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and the
tumblers on it jumped about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's
starvin us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so pat,
stwaiht on his snout... 'Ah, what a... what a...!' and I sta'ted
fwashin him... Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" cried
Denisov, leeful and yet anry, his white teeth showin under his black
mustache. "I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him away!"

"But what are you shoutin for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've set
your arm bleedin afresh. Wait, we must tie it up aain."

Denisov was bandaed up aain and put to bed. Next day he woke calm and
cheerful.

But at noon the adjutant of the reiment came into Rostov's and
Denisov's duout with a rave and serious face and reretfully showed
them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the reimental commander in
which inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence. The adjutant
told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn: that a
court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the severity with
which maraudin and insubordination were now rearded, deradation to
the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.

The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, after
seizin the transports, Major Denisov, bein drunk, went to the chief
quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened
to strike him, and on bein led out had rushed into the office and iven
two officials a thrashin, and dislocated the arm of one of them.

In answer to Rostov's renewed questions, Denisov said, lauhin, that he
thouht he remembered that some other fellow had ot mixed up in it, but
that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the least fear
any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he
would ive them an answer that they would not easily foret.

Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew him
too well not to detect that (while hidin it from others) at heart he
feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which was
evidently takin a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and notices
from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was ordered to
hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before the
staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat
office. On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack
reiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was his wont, rode
out in front of the outposts, paradin his courae. A bullet fired by a
French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his le. Perhaps at
another time Denisov would not have left the reiment for so sliht a
wound, but now he took advantae of it to excuse himself from appearin
at the staff and went into hospital.




CHAPTER XVII

In June the battle of Friedland was fouht, in which the Pavlorads did
not take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rostov, who
felt his friend's absence very much, havin no news of him since he left
and feelin very anxious about his wound and the proress of his
affairs, took advantae of the armistice to et leave to visit Denisov
in hospital.

The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated
by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so
beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly
dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,
tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wanderin about.

The hospital was in a brick buildin with some of the window frames and
panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence
that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandaed soldiers, with pale
swollen faces, were sittin or walkin about in the sunshine in the
yard.

Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of
putrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army
doctor smokin a ciar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.

"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was sayin. "Come to Makar
Alexeevich in the evenin. I shall be there."

The assistant asked some further questions.

"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticed
Rostov comin upstairs.

"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? The bullets
havin spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir."

"How so?" asked Rostov.

"Typhus, sir. It's death to o in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (he
pointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors have
died in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"
said the doctor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors have been
invited here, but our allies don't like it at all."

Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars, who
was wounded.

"I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in chare
of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It's well that
the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some
lint each month or we should be lost!" he lauhed. "Four hundred, sir,
and they're always sendin me fresh ones. There are four hundred? Eh?"
he asked, turnin to the assistant.

The assistant looked faed out. He was evidently vexed and impatient
for the talkative doctor to o.

"Major Denisov," Rostov said aain. "He was wounded at Molliten."

"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of
indifference.

The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.

"Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the doctor.

Rostov described Denisov's appearance.

"There was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That one is
dead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have you
ot it, Makeev?"

"Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if you'll
step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added,
turnin to Rostov.

"Ah, you'd better not o, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have to
stay here yourself."

But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to
show him the way.

"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.

Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so
stron there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect his
strenth before he could o on. A door opened to the riht, and an
emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothin, limped
out and, leanin aainst the doorpost, looked with litterin envious
eyes at those who were passin. lancin in at the door, Rostov saw that
the sick and wounded were lyin on the floor on straw and overcoats.

"May I o in and look?"

"What is there to see?" said the assistant.

But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to o in,
Rostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he had already
beun to et used in the corridor, was still stroner here. It was a
little different, more punent, and one felt that this was where it
oriinated.

In the lon room, brihtly lit up by the sun throuh the lare windows,
the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, and
leavin a passae in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and paid
no attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raised
themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at
Rostov with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and envy
of another's health. Rostov went to the middle of the room and lookin
throuh the open doors into the two adjoinin rooms saw the same thin
there. He stood still, lookin silently around. He had not at all
expected such a siht. Just before him, almost across the middle of the
passae on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to jude
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his hue arms and les
outstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that
only the whites were seen, and on his bare les and arms which were
still red, the veins stood out like cords. He was knockin the back of
his head aainst the floor, hoarsely utterin some word which he kept
repeatin. Rostov listened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink,
a drink!" Rostov lanced round, lookin for someone who would put this
man back in his place and brin him water.

"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.

Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from the
next room, marchin stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.

"ood day, your honor!" he shouted, rollin his eyes at Rostov and
evidently mistakin him for one of the hospital authorities.

"et him to his place and ive him some water," said Rostov, pointin to
the Cossack.

"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rollin his
eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straihter, but did not
move.

"No, it's impossible to do anythin here," thouht Rostov, lowerin his
eyes, and he was oin out, but became aware of an intense look fixed on
him on his riht, and he turned. Close to the corner, on an overcoat,
sat an old, unshaven, ray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with a
stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov. The man's neihbor
on one side whispered somethin to him, pointin at Rostov, who noticed
that the old man wanted to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that the
old man had only one le bent under him, the other had been amputated
above the knee. His neihbor on the other side, who lay motionless some
distance from him with his head thrown back, was a youn soldier with a
snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were
rolled back. Rostov looked at the youn soldier and a cold chill ran
down his back.

"Why, this one seems..." he bean, turnin to the assistant.

"And how we've been bein, your honor," said the old soldier, his jaw
quiverin. "He's been dead since mornin. After all we're men, not
dos."

"I'll send someone at once. He shall be taken away--taken away at once,"
said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us o, your honor."

"Yes, yes, let us o," said Rostov hastily, and lowerin his eyes and
shrinkin, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful
envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the room.




CHAPTER XVIII

oin alon the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers'
wards, consistin of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There
were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lyin or
sittin on them. Some were walkin about the rooms in hospital dressin
owns. The first person Rostov met in the officers' ward was a thin
little man with one arm, who was walkin about the first room in a
nihtcap and hospital dressin own, with a pipe between his teeth.
Rostov looked at him, tryin to remember where he had seen him before.

"See where we've met aain!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin, don't
you remember, who ave you a lift at Schon rabern? And I've had a bit
cut off, you see..." he went on with a smile, pointin to the empty
sleeve of his dressin own. "Lookin for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? My
neihbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted. "Here, here," and
Tushin led him into the next room, from whence came sounds of several
lauhin voices.

"How can they lauh, or even live at all here?" thouht Rostov, still
aware of that smell of decomposin flesh that had been so stron in the
soldiers' ward, and still seemin to see fixed on him those envious
looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of that
youn soldier with eyes rolled back.

Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, thouh it
was nearly noon.

"Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still in the same
voice as in the reiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that under this
habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feelin showed
itself in the expression of Denisov's face and the intonations of his
voice.

His wound, thouh a sliht one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks
after he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces
of the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov.
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem lad to see him, and
smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the reiment, nor about
the eneral state of affairs, and when Rostov spoke of these matters did
not listen.

Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the
reiment, or in eneral of that other free life which was oin on
outside the hospital. He seemed to try to foret that old life and was
only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On
Rostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced from
under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the
rouh draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he bean
readin his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the stinin
rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions, who had
athered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside--radually
bean to disperse as soon as Denisov bean readin his answer. Rostov
noticed by their faces that all those entlemen had already heard that
story more than once and were tired of it. Only the man who had the next
bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his bed, loomily frownin and
smokin a pipe, and little one-armed Tushin still listened, shakin his
head disapprovinly. In the middle of the readin, the Uhlan interrupted
Denisov.

"But what I say is," he said, turnin to Rostov, "it would be best
simply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say reat rewards will
now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be ranted...."

"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he
tried hard to ive the old enery and fire, but which sounded like an
expression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber I would
ask mercy, but I'm bein court-martialed for bwinin wobbers to book.
Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've served the Tsar and my
countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be dewaded?...
Listen, I'm w'itin to them stwaiht. This is what I say: 'If I had
wobbed the Tweasuwy...'"

"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the point,
Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to submit, and
Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told you it was a
bad business."

"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.

"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "and you
ouht to sin it and ask this entleman to take it. No doubt he"
(indicatin Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find a
better opportunity."

"Haven't I said I'm not oin to wovel?" Denisov interrupted him, went
on readin his paper.

Rostov had not the courae to persuade Denisov, thouh he instinctively
felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the
safest, and thouh he would have been lad to be of service to Denisov.
He knew his stubborn will and straihtforward hasty temper.

When the readin of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more than an
hour, was over, Rostov said nothin, and he spent the rest of the day in
a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov's hospital comrades, who had
athered round him, tellin them what he knew and listenin to their
stories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evenin.

Late in the evenin, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked Denisov
whether he had no commission for him.

"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, lancin round at the officers, and
takin his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where he
had an inkpot, and sat down to write.

"It seems it's no use knockin one's head aainst a wall!" he said,
comin from the window and ivin Rostov a lare envelope. In it was the
petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in which Denisov,
without alludin to the offenses of the commissariat officials, simply
asked for pardon.

"Hand it in. It seems..."

He did not finish, but ave a painfully unnatural smile.




CHAPTER XIX

Havin returned to the reiment and told the commander the state of
Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.

On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in
Tilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personae on whom he
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
Tilsit.

"I should like to see the reat man," he said, alludin to Napoleon,
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.

"You are speakin of Buonaparte?" asked the eneral, smilin.

Boris looked at his eneral inquirinly and immediately saw that he was
bein tested.

"I am speakin, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. The
eneral patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.

"You will o far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.

Boris was amon the few present at the Niemen on the day the two
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monorams, saw Napoleon
pass before the French uards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern
on the bank of the Niemen awaitin Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors
et into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reachin the raft first--stepped
quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how
they both retired into the pavilion. Since he had beun to move in the
hihest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all
that went on around him and to note it down. At the time of the meetin
at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and
about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spoken
by important personaes. At the moment the Emperors went into the
pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not foret to look at it aain
when Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and fifty-
three minutes. He noted this down that same evenin, amon other facts
he felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor's suite was a very
small one, it was a matter of reat importance, for a man who valued his
success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of this
interview between the two Emperors, and havin succeeded in this, Boris
felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not only
become known, but people had rown accustomed to him and accepted him.
Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so that the
latter knew his face, and all those at court, far from cold-shoulderin
him as at first when they considered him a newcomer, would now have been
surprised had he been absent.

Boris loded with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.
Zhilinski, a Pole brouht up in Paris, was rich, and passionately fond
of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
officers of the uard and from French headquarters were dinin and
lunchin with him and Boris.

On the evenin of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski arraned a
supper for his French friends. The uest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the uard, and a
pae of Napoleon's, a youn lad of an old aristocratic French family.
That same day, Rostov, profitin by the darkness to avoid bein
reconized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodin
occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.

Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far from
havin experienced the chane of feelin toward Napoleon and the French-
-who from bein foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken place
at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonaparte and the French were
still rearded with minled feelins of aner, contempt, and fear. Only
recently, talkin with one of Platov's Cossack officers, Rostov had
arued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be treated not as a
soverein, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happenin to meet a wounded
French colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with heat that peace
was impossible between a leitimate soverein and the criminal
Bonaparte. Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of
French officers in Boris' lodin, dressed in uniforms he had been
accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from the outposts
of the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer, who thrust his
head out of the door, that warlike feelin of hostility which he always
experienced at the siht of the enemy suddenly seized him. He stopped at
the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived there.
Boris, hearin a strane voice in the anteroom, came out to meet him. An
expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face on first
reconizin Rostov.

"Ah, it's you? Very lad, very lad to see you," he said, however,
comin toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his first
impulse.

"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have
business," he said coldly.

"No, I only wonder how you manaed to et away from your reiment. Dans
un moment je suis a vous," * he said, answerin someone who called him.


* "In a minute I shall be at your disposal."

"I see I'm intrudin," Rostov repeated.

The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face: havin
evidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietly took both
Rostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes, lookin
serenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled by somethin, as if
screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to Rostov.

"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wron time!" said Boris, and he
led him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced him
to his uests, explainin that he was not a civilian, but an hussar
officer, and an old friend of his.

"Count Zhilinski--le Comte N. N.--le Capitaine S. S.," said he, namin
his uests. Rostov looked frowninly at the Frenchmen, bowed
reluctantly, and remained silent.

Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very
willinly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did not
appear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same
pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which he
had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the Frenchmen,
with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen, addressed the
obstinately taciturn Rostov, sayin that the latter had probably come to
Tilsit to see the Emperor.

"No, I came on business," replied Rostov, briefly.

Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look of
dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a bad
humor, it seemed to him that everyone rearded him with aversion and
that he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he alone
took no part in the conversation which aain became eneral. The looks
the visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what is he sittin here
for?" He rose and went up to Boris.

"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk over my
business and I'll o away."

"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and lie
down in my room and have a rest."

"Yes, really..."

They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, without
sittin down, bean at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame in
some way) tellin him about Denisov's affair, askin him whether,
throuh his eneral, he could and would intercede with the Emperor on
Denisov's behalf and et Denisov's petition handed in. When he and Boris
were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris
in the face without a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with one le crossed
over the other and strokin his left hand with the slender finers of
his riht, listened to Rostov as a eneral listens to the report of a
subordinate, now lookin aside and now azin straiht into Rostov's
eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened Rostov felt
uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.

"I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe in
such affairs. I think it would be best not to brin it before the
Emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But in eneral,
I think..."

"So you don't want to do anythin? Well then, say so!" Rostov almost
shouted, not lookin Boris in the face.

Boris smiled.

"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thouht..."

At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard callin Boris.

"Well then, o, o, o..." said Rostov, and refusin supper and
remainin alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a lon
time, hearin the lihthearted French conversation from the next room.




CHAPTER XX

Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on
Denisov's behalf. He could not himself o to the eneral in attendance
as he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so,
and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on the
followin day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace were
sined. The Emperors exchaned decorations: Alexander received the Cross
of the Leion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the First
Deree, and a dinner had been arraned for the evenin, iven by a
battalion of the French uards to the Preobrazhensk battalion. The
Emperors were to be present at that banquet.

Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, when the
latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early next
mornin went away, avoidin Boris. In his civilian clothes and a round
hat, he wandered about the town, starin at the French and their
uniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and French
Emperors were stayin. In a square he saw tables bein set up and
preparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colors
draped from side to side of the streets, with hue monorams A and N. In
the windows of the houses also flas and buntin were displayed.

"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That's
settled," thouht Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave
here without havin done all I can for Denisov and certainly not without
ettin his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He is here!" thouht
Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexander
loded.

Saddled horses were standin before the house and the suite were
assemblin, evidently preparin for the Emperor to come out.

"I may see him at any moment," thouht Rostov. "If only I were to hand
the letter direct to him and tell him all... could they really arrest me
for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose side
justice lies. He understands everythin, knows everythin. Who can be
more just, more mananimous than he? And even if they did arrest me for
bein here, what would it matter?" thouht he, lookin at an officer who
was enterin the house the Emperor occupied. "After all, people do o
in.... It's all nonsense! I'll o in and hand the letter to the Emperor
myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it!" And
suddenly with a determination he himself did not expect, Rostov felt for
the letter in his pocket and went straiht to the house.

"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," he
thouht, expectin every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious of
the blood that rushed to his heart at the thouht. "I will fall at his
feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will even
thank me. 'I am happy when I can do ood, but to remedy injustice is the
reatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the soverein sayin. And passin
people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch of the
Emperor's house.

A broad staircase led straiht up from the entry, and to the riht he
saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leadin to the
lower floor.

"Whom do you want?" someone inquired.

"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas, with a
tremor in his voice.

"A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" (he was shown the door
leadin downstairs), "only it won't be accepted."

On hearin this indifferent voice, Rostov rew frihtened at what he was
doin; the thouht of meetin the Emperor at any moment was so
fascinatin and consequently so alarmin that he was ready to run away,
but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostov
entered.

A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and hih boots and
a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standin in that
room, and his valet was buttonin on to the back of his breeches a new
pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,
attracted Rostov's attention. This man was speakin to someone in the
adjoinin room.

"A ood fiure and in her first bloom," he was sayin, but on seein
Rostov, he stopped short and frowned.

"What is it? A petition?"

"What is it?" asked the person in the other room.

"Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces.

"Tell him to come later. He'll be comin out directly, we must o."

"Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."

Rostov turned and was about to o, but the man in the braces stopped
him.

"Whom have you come from? Who are you?"

"I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov.

"Are you an officer?"

"Lieutenant Count Rostov."

"What audacity! Hand it in throuh your commander. And o alon with
you... o," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.

Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were
many officers and enerals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.

Cursin his temerity, his heart sinkin at the thouht of findin
himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and bein put to
shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impropriety
of his conduct and repentin of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, was
makin his way out of the house throuh the brilliant suite when a
familiar voice called him and a hand detained him.

"What are you doin here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deep voice.

It was a cavalry eneral who had obtained the Emperor's special favor
durin this campain, and who had formerly commanded the division in
which Rostov was servin.

Rostov, in dismay, bean justifyin himself, but seein the kindly,
jocular face of the eneral, he took him aside and in an excited voice
told him the whole affair, askin him to intercede for Denisov, whom the
eneral knew. Havin heard Rostov to the end, the eneral shook his head
ravely.

"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. ive me the letter."

Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explainin
Denisov's case, when hasty steps and the jinlin of spurs were heard on
the stairs, and the eneral, leavin him, went to the porch. The
entlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs and went to their
horses. Hayne, the same room who had been at Austerlitz, led up the
Emperor's horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once
was heard on the stairs. Forettin the daner of bein reconized,
Rostov went close to the porch, toether with some inquisitive
civilians, and aain, after two years, saw those features he adored:
that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty and
mildness.... And the feelin of enthusiasm and love for his soverein
rose aain in Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform of the
Preobrazhensk reiment--white chamois-leather breeches and hih boots--
and wearin a star Rostov did not know (it was that of the Leion
d'honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, puttin on his loves
and carryin his hat under his arm. He stopped and looked about him,
brihtenin everythin around by his lance. He spoke a few words to
some of the enerals, and, reconizin the former commander of Rostov's
division, smiled and beckoned to him.

All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the eneral talkin for some time
to the Emperor.

The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse.
Aain the crowd of members of the suite and street azers (amon whom
was Rostov) moved nearer to the Emperor. Stoppin beside his horse, with
his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry eneral and
said in a loud voice, evidently wishin to be heard by all:

"I cannot do it, eneral. I cannot, because the law is stroner than I,"
and he raised his foot to the stirrup.

The eneral bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted and
rode down the street at a allop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostov
ran after him with the crowd.




CHAPTER XXI

The Emperor rode to the square where, facin one another, a battalion of
the Preobrazhensk reiment stood on the riht and a battalion of the
French uards in their bearskin caps on the left.

As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented
arms, another roup of horsemen alloped up to the opposite flank, and
at the head of them Rostov reconized Napoleon. It could be no one else.
He came at a allop, wearin a small hat, a blue uniform open over a
white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder. He was ridin a
very fine thorouhbred ray Arab horse with a crimson old-embroidered
saddlecloth. On approachin Alexander he raised his hat, and as he did
so, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticin that
Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions
shouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said somethin to
Alexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands.
Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander was
sayin somethin affable to him.

In spite of the tramplin of the French endarmes' horses, which were
pushin back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of
Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexander
treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with
the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter
to him.

Alexander and Napoleon, with the lon train of their suites, approached
the riht flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straiht up to
the crowd standin there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close
to the Emperors that Rostov, standin in the front row, was afraid he
miht be reconized.

"Sire, I ask your permission to present the Leion of Honor to the
bravest of your soldiers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulatin
every letter.

This was said by the undersized Napoleon, lookin up straiht into
Alexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him
and, bendin his head, smiled pleasantly.

"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," added
Napoleon, accentuatin each syllable, as with a composure and assurance
exasperatin to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn up
before him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their
Emperor.

"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" said Alexander and
took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the commander of the
battalion.

Bonaparte meanwhile bean takin the love off his small white hand,
tore it in doin so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind him
rushed forward and picked it up.

"To whom shall it be iven?" the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski, in
Russian in a low voice.

"To whomever Your Majesty commands."

The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, lancin back,
remarked:

"But we must ive him an answer."

Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his
scrutiny.

"Can it be me?" thouht Rostov.

"Lazarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, the first
soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.

"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who did
not know where to o. Lazarev stopped, castin a sidelon look at his
colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers called
before the ranks.

Napoleon slihtly turned his head, and put his plump little hand out
behind him as if to take somethin. The members of his suite, uessin
at once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passed
somethin from one to another, and a pae--the same one Rostov had seen
the previous evenin at Boris'--ran forward and, bowin respectfully
over the outstretched hand and not keepin it waitin a moment, laid in
it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without lookin, pressed two
finers toether and the bade was between them. Then he approached
Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently azed at his own monarch),
looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now
doin was done for the sake of his ally, and the small white hand
holdin the Order touched one of Lazarev's buttons. It was as if
Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to dein to touch
that soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded, and
distinuished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid the
cross on Lazarev's breast and, droppin his hand, turned toward
Alexander as thouh sure that the cross would adhere there. And it
really did.

Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and
fastened it to the uniform. Lazarev lanced morosely at the little man
with white hands who was doin somethin to him and, still standin
motionless presentin arms, looked aain straiht into Alexander's eyes,
as if askin whether he should stand there, or o away, or do somethin
else. But receivin no orders, he remained for some time in that riid
position.

The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,
breakin rank, minled with the French uards and sat down at the tables
prepared for them.

Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers embraced
him, conratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers and
civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and French
voices and lauhter filled the air round the tables in the square. Two
officers with flushed faces, lookin cheerful and happy, passed by
Rostov.

"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of them was
sayin. "Have you seen Lazarev?"

"I have."

"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will ive them a dinner."

"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension for
life."

"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donnin a shay
French cap.

"It's a fine thin! First-rate!"

"Have you heard the password?" asked one uards' officer of another.
"The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';
yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, randeur.' One day our Emperor ives it
and next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. eore's
Cross to the bravest of the French uards. It has to be done. He must
respond in kind."

Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhensk
banquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standin by the corner of a
house.

"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could not
refrain from askin what was the matter, so stranely dismal and
troubled was Rostov's face.

"Nothin, nothin," replied Rostov.

"You'll call round?"

"Yes, I will."

Rostov stood at that corner for a lon time, watchin the feast from a
distance. In his mind, a painful process was oin on which he could not
brin to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. Now he
remembered Denisov with his chaned expression, his submission, and the
whole hospital, with arms and les torn off and its dirt and disease. So
vividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked
round to see where the smell came from. Next he thouht of that self-
satisfied Bonaparte, with his small white hand, who was now an Emperor,
liked and respected by Alexander. Then why those severed arms and les
and those dead men?... Then aain he thouht of Lazarev rewarded and
Denisov punished and unpardoned. He cauht himself harborin such
strane thouhts that he was frihtened.

The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eatin and a sense of
huner recalled him from these reflections; he had to et somethin to
eat before oin away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that mornin.
There he found so many people, amon them officers who, like himself,
had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in ettin a
dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversation
naturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most of
the army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle of
Friedland. They said that had we held out a little loner Napoleon would
have been done for, as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition.
Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly the latter) in silence. He finished a
couple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went on
tormentin him without reachin a conclusion. He feared to ive way to
his thouhts, yet could not et rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the
officers' sayin that it was humiliatin to look at the French, Rostov
bean shoutin with uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to the
surprise of the officers:

"How can you jude what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushin to
his face. "How can you jude the Emperor's actions? What riht have we
to arue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's aims or his
actions!"

"But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,
justifyin himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, except
on the supposition that he was drunk.

But Rostov did not listen to him.

"We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothin more," he
went on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished, it
means that we have deserved it, it's not for us to jude. If the Emperor
pleases to reconize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliance
with him, it means that that is the riht thin to do. If once we bein
judin and aruin about everythin, nothin sacred will be left! That
way we shall be sayin there is no od--nothin!" shouted Nicholas,
banin the table--very little to the point as it seemed to his
listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own thouhts.

"Our business is to do our duty, to fiht and not to think! That's
all...." said he.

"And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishin to quarrel.

"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Another bottle!"
he shouted.

In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview with
the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersbur there was
much talk of the randeur of this important meetin.




CHAPTER XXII

In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleon and
Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war on
Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with our old
enemy Bonaparte aainst our old ally the Emperor of Austria, and in
court circles the possibility of marriae between Napoleon and one of
Alexander's sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of forein
policy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenly
directed on the internal chanes that were bein undertaken in all the
departments of overnment.

Life meanwhile--real life, with its essential interests of health and
sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests in thouht,
science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passions--went on
as usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity
with Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.

BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10




CHAPTER I

Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.

All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantly
chanin from one thin to another had never accomplished--were carried
out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.

He had in the hihest deree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked,
and without fuss or strain on his part this set thins oin.

On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and became
free aricultural laborers--this bein one of the first examples of the
kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory labor was
commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was enaed for Boucharovo
at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach readin and writin to
the children of the peasants and household serfs.

Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he spent in
"Boucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince Andrew's estate.
Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had expressed to
Pierre, he diliently followed all that went on, received many books,
and to his surprise noticed that when he or his father had visitors from
Petersbur, the very vortex of life, these people laed behind himself-
-who never left the country--in knowlede of what was happenin in home
and forein affairs.

Besides bein occupied with his estates and readin a reat variety of
books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of our
last two unfortunate campains, and with drawin up a proposal for a
reform of the army rules and reulations.

In the sprin of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had been
inherited by his son, whose uardian he was.

Warmed by the sprin sunshine he sat in the caleche lookin at the new
rass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of white
sprin clouds floatin across the clear blue sky. He was not thinkin of
anythin, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from side to side.

They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before.
They went throuh the muddy villae, past threshin floors and reen
fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still loded near the bride,
uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips of
stubble land and bushes touched with reen here and there, and into a
birch forest rowin on both sides of the road. In the forest it was
almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky reen
leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first blades
of reen rass were pushin up and liftin last year's leaves. The
coarse everreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and there
amon the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter. On enterin the
forest the horses bean to snort and sweated visibly.

Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter assented.
But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enouh for Peter, and he
turned on the box toward his master.

"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile.

"What?"

"It's pleasant, your excellency!"


"What is he talkin about?" thouht Prince Andrew. "Oh, the sprin, I
suppose," he thouht as he turned round. "Yes, really everythin is
reen already.... How early! The birches and cherry and alders too are
comin out.... But the oaks show no sin yet. Ah, here is one oak!"

At the ede of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the ae of the
birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as
tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its irth twice as reat as a man
could embrace, and evidently lon ao some of its branches had been
broken off and its bark scarred. With its hue unainly limbs sprawlin
unsymmetrically, and its narled hands and finers, it stood an aed,
stern, and scornful monster amon the smilin birch trees. Only the
dead-lookin everreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak,
refused to yield to the charm of sprin or notice either the sprin or
the sunshine.

"Sprin, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not weary of
that stupid, meaninless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same and
always a fraud? There is no sprin, no sun, no happiness! Look at those
cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, stickin out my broken
and barked finers just where they have rown, whether from my back or
my sides: as they have rown so I stand, and I do not believe in your
hopes and your lies."

As he passed throuh the forest Prince Andrew turned several times to
look at that oak, as if expectin somethin from it. Under the oak, too,
were flowers and rass, but it stood amon them scowlin, riid,
misshapen, and rim as ever.

"Yes, the oak is riht, a thousand times riht," thouht Prince Andrew.
"Let others--the youn--yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life,
our life is finished!"

A whole sequence of new thouhts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rose
in his soul in connection with that tree. Durin this journey he, as it
were, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion,
restful in its hopelessness: that it was not for him to bein anythin
anew--but that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and not
disturbin himself or desirin anythin.




CHAPTER II

Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district in
connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he was
trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the middle of May
Prince Andrew went to visit him.

It was now hot sprin weather. The whole forest was already clothed in
reen. It was dusty and so hot that on passin near water one loned to
bathe.

Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about which
he had to speak to the Marshal, was drivin up the avenue in the rounds
of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry irlish cries behind
some trees on the riht and saw a roup of irls runnin to cross the
path of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a dark-
haired, remarkably slim, pretty irl in a yellow chintz dress, with a
white handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hair
escaped. The irl was shoutin somethin but, seein that he was a
straner, ran back lauhin without lookin at him.

Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pan. The day was so beautiful,
the sun so briht, everythin around so ay, but that slim pretty irl
did not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented and
cheerful in her own separate--probably foolish--but briht and happy
life. "What is she so lad about? What is she thinkin of? Not of the
military reulations or of the arranement of the Ryazan serfs'
quitrents. Of what is she thinkin? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew
asked himself with instinctive curiosity.

In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was livin at Otradnoe just as he had done in
former years, that is, entertainin almost the whole province with
hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was lad to see Prince
Andrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on his stayin
the niht.

Durin the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by his
elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the old count's
house was crowded on account of an approachin name day), Prince Andrew
repeatedly lanced at Natasha, ay and lauhin amon the youner
members of the company, and asked himself each time, "What is she
thinkin about? Why is she so lad?"

That niht, alone in new surroundins, he was lon unable to sleep. He
read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. It was hot in the
room, the inside shutters of which were closed. He was cross with the
stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had made him stay by assurin
him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town, and he
was vexed with himself for havin stayed.

He ot up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he opened the
shutters the moonliht, as if it had lon been watchin for this, burst
into the room. He opened the casement. The niht was fresh, briht, and
very still. Just before the window was a row of pollard trees, lookin
black on one side and with a silvery liht on the other. Beneath the
trees rew some kind of lush, wet, bushy veetation with silver-lit
leaves and stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees a
roof littered with dew, to the riht was a leafy tree with brilliantly
white trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at its
full, in a pale, almost starless, sprin sky. Prince Andrew leaned his
elbows on the window lede and his eyes rested on that sky.

His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were also
awake. He heard female voices overhead.

"Just once more," said a irlish voice above him which Prince Andrew
reconized at once.

"But when are you comin to bed?" replied another voice.

"I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for the last time."


Two irlish voices san a musical passae--the end of some son.

"Oh, how lovely! Now o to sleep, and there's an end of it."

"You o to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, comin nearer to
the window. She was evidently leanin riht out, for the rustle of her
dress and even her breathin could be heard. Everythin was stone-still,
like the moon and its liht and the shadows. Prince Andrew, too, dared
not stir, for fear of betrayin his unintentional presence.

"Sonya! Sonya!" he aain heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can you
sleep? Only look how lorious it is! Ah, how lorious! Do wake up,
Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, never was
such a lovely niht before!"

Sonya made some reluctant reply.

"Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come here....
Darlin, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sittin down
on my heels, puttin my arms round my knees like this, strainin tiht,
as tiht as possible, and flyin away! Like this...."

"Take care, you'll fall out."

He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapprovin voice: "It's
past one o'clock."

"Oh, you only spoil thins for me. All riht, o, o!"

Aain all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sittin
there. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sih.

"O od, O od! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then,
if it must be!" and she slammed the casement.

"For her I miht as well not exist!" thouht Prince Andrew while he
listened to her voice, for some reason expectin yet fearin that she
miht say somethin about him. "There she is aain! As if it were on
purpose," thouht he.

In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful
thouhts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable
to explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.




CHAPTER III

Next mornin, havin taken leave of no one but the count, and not
waitin for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.

It was already the beinnin of June when on his return journey he drove
into the birch forest where the narled old oak had made so strane and
memorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells sounded
yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was
thick, shady, and dense, and the youn firs dotted about in the forest
did not jar on the eneral beauty but, lendin themselves to the mood
around, were delicately reen with fluffy youn shoots.

The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was atherin, but only a
small cloud had scattered some raindrops lihtly, sprinklin the road
and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the shade,
the riht side littered in the sunliht, wet and shiny and scarcely
swayed by the breeze. Everythin was in blossom, the nihtinales
trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away.

"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I areed," thouht
Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he aain wondered, azin at the left
side of the road, and without reconizin it he looked with admiration
at the very oak he souht. The old oak, quite transfiured, spreadin
out a canopy of sappy dark-reen foliae, stood rapt and slihtly
tremblin in the rays of the evenin sun. Neither narled finers nor
old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now.
Throuh the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twis,
leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran
could have produced.

"Yes, it is the same oak," thouht Prince Andrew, and all at once he was
seized by an unreasonin sprintime feelin of joy and renewal. All the
best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Austerlitz with
the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at the
ferry, that irl thrilled by the beauty of the niht, and that niht
itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.

"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided
finally and decisively. "It is not enouh for me to know what I have in
me--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that youn irl who wanted to fly
away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not be
lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that
it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"

On reachin home Prince Andrew decided to o to Petersbur that autumn
and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series of
sensible and loical considerations showin it to be essential for him
to o to Petersbur, and even to re-enter the service, kept sprinin up
in his mind. He could not now understand how he could ever even have
doubted the necessity of takin an active share in life, just as a month
before he had not understood how the idea of leavin the quiet country
could ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his
experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to
some kind of work and aain played an active part in life. He did not
even remember how formerly, on the strenth of similar wretched loical
aruments, it had seemed obvious that he would be deradin himself if
he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe
in the possibility of bein useful and in the possibility of happiness
or love. Now reason suested quite the opposite. After that journey to
Ryazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no loner
interested him, and often when sittin alone in his study he ot up,
went to the mirror, and azed a lon time at his own face. Then he would
turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a la
recque looked tenderly and aily at him out of the ilt frame. She did
not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,
merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossin his arms
behind him, lon paced the room, now frownin, now smilin, as he
reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thouhts, secret as a
crime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, with
fame, with the irl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly
cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly loical.

"My dear," Princess Mary enterin at such a moment would say, "little
Nicholas can't o out today, it's very cold."

"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly to
his sister, "he could o out in his smock, but as it is cold he must
wear warm clothes, which were desined for that purpose. That is what
follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needs
fresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme loic, as if
punishin someone for those secret illoical emotions that stirred
within him.

At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries
men up.




CHAPTER IV

Prince Andrew arrived in Petersbur in Auust, 1809. It was the time
when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his
reforms were bein pushed forward with the reatest enery. That same
Auust the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his le, and
remained three weeks at Peterhof, receivin Speranski every day and no
one else. At that time the two famous decrees were bein prepared that
so aitated society--abolishin court ranks and introducin examinations
to qualify for the rades of Colleiate Assessor and State Councilor--
and not merely these but a whole state constitution, intended to chane
the existin order of overnment in Russia: leal, administrative, and
financial, from the Council of State down to the district tribunals. Now
those vaue liberal dreams with which the Emperor Alexander had ascended
the throne, and which he had tried to put into effect with the aid of
his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Stroonov--whom
he himself in jest had called his Comite de salut public--were takin
shape and bein realized.

Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and
Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a
entleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The
Emperor, thouh he met him twice, did not favor him with a sinle word.
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic to
the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
enerally, and in the cold, repellent lance the Emperor ave him, he
now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explained
the Emperor's nelect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's
not havin served since 1805.

"I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies and antipathies,"
thouht Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my proposal for the
reform of the army reulations to the Emperor personally, but the
project will speak for itself."

He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend of
his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him, received
him raciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days later
Prince Andrew received notice that he was to o to see the Minister of
War, Count Arakcheev.

On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waitin
room at nine in the mornin.

He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he had
heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.

"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not
concern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned to
consider my project, so he alone can et it adopted," thouht Prince
Andrew as he waited amon a number of important and unimportant people
in Count Arakcheev's waitin room.

Durin his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the
anterooms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms
were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special
character. The faces of the unimportant people awaitin their turn for
an audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those of
hiher rank expressed a common feelin of awkwardness, covered by a mask
of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the person
for whom they were waitin. Some walked thouhtfully up and down, others
whispered and lauhed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila
Andreevich" and the words, "Uncle will ive it to us hot," in reference
to Count Arakcheev. One eneral (an important personae), evidently
feelin offended at havin to wait so lon, sat crossin and uncrossin
his les and smilin contemptuously to himself.

But the moment the door opened one feelin alone appeared on all faces--
that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on
duty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and was told
that his turn would come in due course. After some others had been shown
in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty, an officer
who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frihtened air was
admitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted a lon
time. Then suddenly the ratin sound of a harsh voice was heard from
the other side of the door, and the officer--with pale face and
tremblin lips--came out and passed throuh the waitin room, clutchin
his head.

After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on
duty said in a whisper, "To the riht, at the window."

Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of
forty with a lon waist, a lon closely cropped head, deep wrinkles,
scowlin brows above dull reenish-hazel eyes and an overhanin red
nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without lookin at him.

"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.

"I am not petitionin, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew quietly.

Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.

"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"

"I am not petitionin about anythin. His Majesty the Emperor has
deined to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."

"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted Arakcheev,
utterin only the first words amiably and then--aain without lookin at
Prince Andrew--relapsin radually into a tone of rumblin contempt.
"You are proposin new military laws? There are many laws but no one to
carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody desins laws, it is easier
writin than doin."

"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from your excellency
how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," said
Prince Andrew politely.

"I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the
committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, risin and takin a
paper from his writin table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.

Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,
misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed because
resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles
of War needlessly deviatin."

"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince
Andrew.

"To the Committee on Army Reulations, and I have recommended that your
honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."

Prince Andrew smiled.

"I don't want one."

"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor... Eh!
Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowin to Prince
Andrew.




CHAPTER V

While waitin for the announcement of his appointment to the committee
Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he
knew to be in power and whose aid he miht need. In Petersbur he now
experienced the same feelin he had had on the eve of a battle, when
troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the rulin
circles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, was
bein shaped. From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of the
uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupation
of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose
existence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in
Petersbur a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in
chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who was
supposed to be a man of enius--Speranski. And this movement of
reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vaue idea, and Speranski
its chief promoter, bean to interest him so keenly that the question of
the army reulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his
consciousness.

Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure ood reception in the
hihest and most diverse Petersbur circles of the day. The reformin
party cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because he
was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because by
liberatin his serfs he had obtained the reputation of bein a liberal.
The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,
turned to him expectin his sympathy in their disapproval of the
reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine
society world welcomed him ladly, because he was rich, distinuished, a
ood match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account of
his supposed death and the traic loss of his wife. Besides this the
eneral opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had
reatly improved durin these last five years, havin softened and rown
more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,
and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.

The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent
the evenin at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his interview with
Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with the
same vaue irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War's
anteroom).

"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael Mikhaylovich
Speranski. He manaes everythin. I'll speak to him. He has promised to
come this evenin."

"What has Speranski to do with the army reulations?" asked Prince
Andrew.

Kochubey shook his head smilinly, as if surprised at Bolkonski's
simplicity.

"We were talkin to him about you a few days ao," Kochubey continued,
"and about your freed plowmen."

"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man of
Catherine's day, turnin contemptuously toward Bolkonski.

"It was a small estate that brouht in no profit," replied Prince
Andrew, tryin to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man
uselessly.

"Afraid of bein late..." said the old man, lookin at Kochubey.

"There's one thin I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow the
land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to
rule.... Just the same as now--I ask you, Count--who will be heads of
the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"

"Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossin
his les and lancin round.

"Well, I have Pryanichnikov servin under me, a splendid man, a
priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to o up for examination?"

"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all eneral, but..."

Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,
and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a lare open
forehead and a lon face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was just
enterin. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a cross
suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It was Speranski.
Prince Andrew reconized him at once, and felt a throb within him, as
happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy,
or anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole fiure was of a
peculiar type that made him easily reconizable. In the society in which
Prince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who toether with awkward
and clumsy estures possessed such calmness and self-assurance; he had
never seen so resolute yet entle an expression as that in those half-
closed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed nothin;
nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all he had
never seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands--hands which were
broad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness
Prince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been lon
in hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to the
Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met and
talked with Napoleon.

Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as people
involuntarily do on enterin a lare company and was in no hurry to
speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, and
he looked only at the person with whom he was conversin.

Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement with
particular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men who
jude those near to them severely, he always on meetin anyone new--
especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputation--expected
to discover in him the perfection of human qualities.

Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner
as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperor
had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.
When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyes
to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence.

"I am very lad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, as
everyone has," he said after a pause.

Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had iven
Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.

"The chairman of the Committee on Army Reulations is my ood friend
Monsieur Manitski," he said, fully articulatin every word and
syllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He paused
at the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co-
operate in promotin all that is reasonable."

A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked
about his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.

Prince Andrew without joinin in the conversation watched every movement
of Speranski's: this man, not lon since an insinificant divinity
student, who now, Bolkonski thouht, held in his hands--those plump
white hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the
extraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the
old man. He appeared to address condescendin words to him from an
immeasurable heiht. When the old man bean to speak too loud, Speranski
smiled and said he could not jude of the advantae or disadvantae of
what pleased the soverein.

Havin talked for a little while in the eneral circle, Speranski rose
and comin up to Prince Andrew took him alon to the other end of the
room. It was clear that he thouht it necessary to interest himself in
Bolkonski.

"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, durin the animated
conversation in which that venerable entleman involved me," he said
with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimatin by that smile that he
and Prince Andrew understood the insinificance of the people with whom
he had just been talkin. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known of
you for a lon time: first from your action with reard to your serfs, a
first example, of which it is very desirable that there should be more
imitators; and secondly because you are one of those entlemen of the
chamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decree
concernin the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causin so much
ossip and tittle-tattle."

"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take advantae
of the privilee. I bean the service from the lower rade."

"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our
contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes
natural justice."

"I think, however, that these condemnations have some round," returned
Prince Andrew, tryin to resist Speranski's influence, of which he bean
to be conscious. He did not like to aree with him in everythin and
felt a wish to contradict. Thouh he usually spoke easily and well, he
felt a difficulty in expressin himself now while talkin with
Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observin the famous man's
personality.

"rounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly.

"And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.

"What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowerin his eyes.

"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea
that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.
Certains droits et privilees de la noblesse me paraissent etre des
moyens de soutenir ce sentiment." *


* "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable.
Certain rihts and privilees for the aristocracy appear to me a means
of maintainin that sentiment."

The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improved
by the chane. Probably Prince Andrew's thouht interested him.

"Si vous envisaez la question sous ce point de vue," * he bean,
pronouncin French with evident difficulty, and speakin even slower
than in Russian but quite calmly.


* "If you reard the question from that point of view."

Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honneur, cannot be upheld by
privilees harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either a
neative concept of not doin what is blameworthy or it is a source of
emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which reconize it.
His aruments were concise, simple, and clear.

"An institution upholdin honor, the source of emulation, is one similar
to the Leion d'honneur of the reat Emperor Napoleon, not harmful but
helpful to the success of the service, but not a class or court
privilee."

"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privilees
have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every courtier
considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."

"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilee, Prince," said
Speranski, indicatin by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an
arument which was embarrassin for his companion. "If you will do me
the honor of callin on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, after
talkin with Manitski, let you know what may interest you, and shall
also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."

Closin his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without takin leave, and
tryin to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.




CHAPTER VI

Durin the first weeks of his stay in Petersbur Prince Andrew felt the
whole trend of thouht he had formed durin his life of seclusion quite
overshadowed by the triflin cares that enrossed him in that city.

On returnin home in the evenin he would jot down in his notebook four
or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanism
of life, the arranement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,
absorbed the reater part of his vital enery. He did nothin, did not
even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked
successfully, of what he had thouht while in the country.

He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the same
remark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busy for
whole days toether that he had no time to notice that he was thinkin
of nothin.

As he had done on their first meetin at Kochubey's, Speranski produced
a stron impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he received
him tête-à-tête at his own house and talked to him lon and
confidentially.

To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insinificant
creatures, and he so loned to find in someone the livin ideal of that
perfection toward which he strove, that he readily believed that in
Speranski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuous
man. Had Speranski sprun from the same class as himself and possessed
the same breedin and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered
his weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strane and
loical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he
did not quite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he
appreciated the other's capacity or because he considered it necessary
to win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness
before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which
oes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption
that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of
understandin the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness
and profundity of one's own ideas.

Durin their lon conversation on Wednesday evenin, Speranski more than
once remarked: "We reard everythin that is above the common level of
rooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fed
and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot understand this..." and
all in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what they
are and who we are."

This first lon conversation with Speranski only strenthened in Prince
Andrew the feelin he had experienced toward him at their first meetin.
He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinkin man of vast intellect who by
his enery and persistence had attained power, which he was usin solely
for the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Speranski was the man
he would himself have wished to be--one who explained all the facts of
life reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and was
capable of applyin the standard of reason to everythin. Everythin
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew
involuntarily areed with him about everythin. If he replied and
arued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and
not submit to Speranski's opinions entirely. Everythin was riht and
everythin was as it should be: only one thin disconcerted Prince
Andrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did not allow
one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which Prince
Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who
possess power. This mirrorlike aze and those delicate hands irritated
Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the
excessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by the
diversity of lines of arument he used to support his opinions. He made
use of every kind of mental device, except analoy, and passed too
boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. Now he would
take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now that
of a satirist, and lauh ironically at his opponents; now row severely
loical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last
resource was one he very frequently employed.) He would transfer a
question to metaphysical heihts, pass on to definitions of space, time,
and thouht, and, havin deduced the refutation he needed, would aain
descend to the level of the oriinal discussion.

In eneral the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrew
most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authority
of reason. It was evident that the thouht could never occur to him
which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is after all
impossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never felt the
doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was just this
peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted Prince
Andrew.

Durin the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a
passionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt for
Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a villae priest, and
that stupid people miht meanly despise him on account of his humble
oriin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish his
sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strenthen it.

On that first evenin Bolkonski spent with him, havin mentioned the
Commission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him
sarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty
years, had cost millions, and had done nothin except that Rosenkampf
had stuck labels on the correspondin pararaphs of the different codes.

"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he.
"We want to ive the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.
That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in these
times!"

Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence was
needed which he did not possess.

"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circle
from which we must break a way out."

A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army
Reulations and--what he had not at all expected--was chairman of a
section of the committee for the revision of the laws. At Speranski's
request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was bein drawn up
and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian,
he worked at formulatin the section on Personal Rihts.




CHAPTER VII

Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returnin to Petersbur
after visitin his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leadin
position amon the Petersbur Freemasons. He arraned dinin and funeral
lode meetins, enrolled new members, and busied himself unitin various
lodes and acquirin authentic charters. He ave money for the erection
of temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,
in reard to which the majority of members were stiny and irreular. He
supported almost sinlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in
Petersbur.

His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations and
dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and thouh he considered
it immoral and humiliatin could not resist the temptations of the
bachelor circles in which he moved.

Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre at
the end of a year bean to feel that the more firmly he tried to rest
upon it, the more masonic round on which he stood ave way under him.
At the same time he felt that the deeper the round sank under him the
closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined
the Freemasons he had experienced the feelin of one who confidently
steps onto the smooth surface of a bo. When he put his foot down it
sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the round, he put his
other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, and
involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bo.

Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersbur--he had of late stood aside from
the affairs of the Petersbur lodes, and lived almost entirely in
Moscow. All the members of the lodes were men Pierre knew in ordinary
life, and it was difficult for him to reard them merely as Brothers in
Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew in
society mostly as weak and insinificant men. Under the masonic aprons
and insinia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in
ordinary life. Often after collectin alms, and reckonin up twenty to
thirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozen
members, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierre
remembered the masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote all
his belonins to his neihbor, and doubts on which he tried not to
dwell arose in his soul.

He divided the Brothers he knew into four cateories. In the first he
put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodes
or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical
science of the order: with questions of the threefold desination of
od, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury, and salt--or the
meanin of the square and all the various fiures of the temple of
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
chiefly beloned, includin, Pierre thouht, Joseph Alexeevich himself,
but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mystical
aspect of Freemasonry.

In the second cateory Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,
seekin and vacillatin, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straiht
and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.

In the third cateory he included those Brothers (the majority) who saw
nothin in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prized
the strict performance of these forms without troublin about their
purport or sinificance. Such were Willarski and even the rand Master
of the principal lode.

Finally, to the fourth cateory also a reat many Brothers beloned,
particularly those who had lately joined. These accordin to Pierre's
observations were men who had no belief in anythin, nor desire for
anythin, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy
youn Brothers who were influential throuh their connections or rank,
and of whom there were very many in the lode.

Pierre bean to feel dissatisfied with what he was doin. Freemasonry,
at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely on
externals. He did not think of doubtin Freemasonry itself, but
suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wron path and deviated from
its oriinal principles. And so toward the end of the year he went
abroad to be initiated into the hiher secrets of the order.

In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersbur. Our Freemasons knew
from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained the
confidence of many hihly placed persons, had been initiated into many
mysteries, had been raised to a hiher rade, and was brinin back with
him much that miht conduce to the advantae of the masonic cause in
Russia. The Petersbur Freemasons all came to see him, tried to
inratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he was
preparin somethin for them and concealin it.

A solemn meetin of the lode of the second deree was convened, at
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersbur Brothers what he
had to deliver to them from the hihest leaders of their order. The
meetin was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and bean
his address.

"Dear Brothers," he bean, blushin and stammerin, with a written
speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries in
the seclusion of our lode--we must act--act! We are drowsin, but we
must act." Pierre raised his notebook and bean to read.

"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of
virtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse
principles in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake the
education of the youn, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with the
wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, and
folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked toether by unity
of purpose and possessed of authority and power.

"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over vice
and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,
receive a lastin reward for his virtue. But in these reat endeavors we
are ravely hampered by the political institutions of today. What is to
be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow
everythin, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that.
Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy evil
while men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs no
violence.

"The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparin
men of firmness and virtue bound toether by unity of conviction--aimin
at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizin talent and virtue:
raisin worthy men from the dust and attachin them to our Brotherhood.
Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands
of the protectors of disorder and to control them without their bein
aware of it. In a word, we must found a form of overnment holdin
universal sway, which should be diffused over the whole world without
destroyin the bonds of citizenship, and beside which all other
overnments can continue in their customary course and do everythin
except what impedes the reat aim of our order, which is to obtain for
virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself.
It tauht men to be wise and ood and for their own benefit to follow
the example and instruction of the best and wisest men.

"At that time, when everythin was pluned in darkness, preachin alone
was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with special
strenth, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is now
necessary that man, overned by his senses, should find in virtue a
charm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate the
passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is
therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passions
within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end.

"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state, each
of them aain trainin two others and all bein closely united,
everythin will be possible for our order, which has already in secret
accomplished much for the welfare of mankind."

This speech not only made a stron impression, but created excitement in
the lode. The majority of the Brothers, seein in it danerous desins
of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The rand
Master bean answerin him, and Pierre bean developin his views with
more and more warmth. It was lon since there had been so stormy a
meetin. Parties were formed, some accusin Pierre of Illuminism, others
supportin him. At that meetin he was struck for the first time by the
endless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from ever
presentin itself identically to two persons. Even those members who
seemed to be on his side understood him in their own way with
limitations and alterations he could not aree to, as what he always
wanted most was to convey his thouht to others just as he himself
understood it.


* The Illuminati souht to substitute republican for monarchical
institutions.

At the end of the meetin the rand Master with irony and ill-will
reproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue
alone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.
Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal would
be accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waitin for the
usual formalities he left the lode and went home.




CHAPTER VIII

Aain Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For three
days after the delivery of his speech at the lode he lay on a sofa at
home receivin no one and oin nowhere.

It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who implored
him to see her, tellin him how rieved she was about him and how she
wished to devote her whole life to him.

At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she would
return to Petersbur from abroad.

Followin this letter one of the masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turnin the
conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal
advice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wron and
that he was nelectin one of the first rules of Freemasonry by not
forivin the penitent.

At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to him
implorin him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a most
important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy aainst him and
that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood he then
was, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothin mattered to him.
Nothin in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the
influence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither his
liberty nor his resolution to punish his wife.

"No one is riht and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," he
thouht.

If he did not at once ive his consent to a reunion with his wife, it
was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.
Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference
whether he lived with his wife or not?

Without replyin either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
one niht prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph
Alexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:

Moscow, 17th November

I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what I
have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is livin poorly and has for three
years been sufferin from a painful disease of the bladder. No one has
ever heard him utter a roan or a word of complaint. From mornin till
late at niht, except when he eats his very plain food, he is workin at
science. He received me raciously and made me sit down on the bed on
which he lay. I made the sin of the Knihts of the East and of
Jerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, askin me with a mild
smile what I had learned and ained in the Prussian and Scottish lodes.
I told him everythin as best I could, and told him what I had proposed
to our Petersbur lode, of the bad reception I had encountered, and of
my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexeevich, havin remained silent
and thouhtful for a ood while, told me his view of the matter, which
at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.
He surprised me by askin whether I remembered the threefold aim of the
order: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The
purification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) The
improvement of the human race by strivin for such purification. Which
is the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation and
self-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independently
of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the
reatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losin siht of
this aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our
impurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of the
human race while ourselves settin an example of baseness and
profliacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it is
attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this round
Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the
depth of my soul I areed with him. Talkin of my family affairs he said
to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies in
perfectin himself. We often think that by removin all the difficulties
of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary, my
dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain
our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowlede--for man can only know himself
by comparison, (2) Self-perfectin, which can only be attained by
conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our
innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words are all
the more remarkable because, in spite of his reat physical sufferins,
Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life thouh he loves death, for
which--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he does
not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained
to me fully the meanin of the reat Square of creation and pointed out
to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everythin. He
advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersbur Brothers, but to
take up only second-rade posts in the lode, to try, while divertin
the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path self-
knowlede and self-perfectin. Besides this he advised me for myself
personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end he
ave me a notebook, the one I am now writin in and in which I will in
future note down all my actions.

Petersbur, 23rd November

I am aain livin with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears and
said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her; that she
was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that if
I once let myself see her I should not have strenth to o on refusin
what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to
seek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do. I
went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled my
conversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ouht not to
refuse a supplicant, and ouht to reach a helpin hand to everyone--
especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear my cross.
But if I forive her for the sake of doin riht, then let union with
her have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and what I wrote
to Joseph Alexeevich. I told my wife that I beed her to foret the
past, to forive me whatever wron I may have done her, and that I had
nothin to forive. It ave me joy to tell her this. She need not know
how hard it was for me to see her aain. I have settled on the upper
floor of this bi house and am experiencin a happy feelin of
reeneration.




CHAPTER IX

At that time, as always happens, the hihest society that met at court
and at the rand balls was divided into several circles, each with its
own particular tone. The larest of these was the French circle of the
Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt. In
this roup Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersbur with her
husband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members of
the French embassy and by many belonin to that circle and noted for
their intellect and polished manners.

Helene had been at Erfurt durin the famous meetin of the Emperors and
had brouht from there these connections with the Napoleonic
notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself
had noticed her in the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbe
animal." * Her success as a beautiful and eleant woman did not surprise
Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did surprise
him was that durin these last two years his wife had succeeded in
ainin the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que
belle." *(2) The distinuished Prince de Line wrote her eiht-pae
letters. Bilibin saved up his epirams to produce them in Countess
Bezukhova's presence. To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salon
was rearded as a diploma of intellect. Youn men read books before
attendin Helene's evenins, to have somethin to say in her salon, and
secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew
she was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strane feelin of
perplexity and fear, her evenins and dinner parties, where politics,
poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties his feelins
were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found
out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just what was
needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found
pleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene
Bezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly
established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest thins and
everybody would o into raptures over every word of hers and look for a
profound meanin in it of which she herself had no conception.


* "That's a superb animal."

* (2) "Of a charmin woman, as witty as she is lovely."

Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was
that absent-minded crank, a rand seineur husband who was in no one's
way, and far from spoilin the hih tone and eneral impression of the
drawin room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an
advantaeous backround to his eleant and tactful wife. Pierre durin
the last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract
interests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in his
wife's circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,
indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquired
artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered his
wife's drawin room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with
everybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to
them all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him
and, reardless of whether any "entlemen of the embassy" were present
or not, lispinly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all
in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the eneral opinion
concernin the queer husband of "the most distinuished woman in
Petersbur" was so well established that no one took his freaks
seriously.

Amon the many youn men who frequented her house every day, Boris
Drubetskoy, who had already achieved reat success in the service, was
the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's return
from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon pae" and treated him like a
child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimes
that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris behaved with a
particularly dinified and sad deference. This shade of deference also
disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before from
the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now
protected himself from the daner of its repetition, first by not bein
a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowin himself to suspect.

"No, now that she has become a bluestockin she has finally renounced
her former infatuations," he told himself. "There has never been an
instance of a bluestockin bein carried away by affairs of the heart"--
a statement which, thouh athered from an unknown source, he believed
implicitly. Yet strane to say Boris' presence in his wife's drawin
room (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon Pierre;
it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and freedom
of his movements.

"What a strane antipathy," thouht Pierre, "yet I used to like him very
much."

In the eyes of the world Pierre was a reat entleman, the rather blind
and absurd husband of a distinuished wife, a clever crank who did
nothin but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, ood-natured fellow. But
a complex and difficult process of internal development was takin place
all this time in Pierre's soul, revealin much to him and causin him
many spiritual doubts and joys.




CHAPTER X

Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it durin
that time:

24th November

ot up at eiht, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By Joseph
Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and
served on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dined
alone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drank
moderately and after dinner copied out some passaes for the Brothers.
In the evenin I went down to the countess and told a funny story about
B., and only remembered that I ouht not to have done so when everybody
lauhed loudly at it.

I am oin to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. reat od, help me to
walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer aner by calmness and deliberation,
(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdraw
from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) family
duties, (c) relations with my friends, and the manaement of my affairs.

27th November

I ot up late. On wakin I lay lon in bed yieldin to sloth. O od,
help and strenthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,
but without proper feelin. Brother Urusov came and we talked about
worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new projects. I bean to
criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's words--that
a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid
is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tonue
is my enemy. Brothers . V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary
talk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty of
Rhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our talk turned to the
interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple, the seven
sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the seven ifts of the
Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evenin the admission
took place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the
manificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.
I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strane feelin aitated me all
the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. I cauht myself
harborin a feelin of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to
overcome. That is why I should really like to save him from evil and
lead him into the path of truth, but evil thouhts of him did not leave
me. It seemed to me that his object in enterin the Brotherhood was
merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lode. Apart from
the fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were
members of our lode (a question to which I could not reply) and that
accordin to my observation he is incapable of feelin respect for our
holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man to
desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him, but he seemed
to me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the dark
temple it seemed to me that he was smilin contemptuously at my words,
and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it.
I could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the
Brothers and to the rand Master. reat Architect of Nature, help me to
find the true path out of the labyrinth of lies!


After this, three paes were left blank in the diary, and then the
followin was written:

I have had a lon and instructive talk alone with Brother V., who
advised me to hold fast by Brother A. Thouh I am unworthy, much was
revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim
is the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterable
which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strenthen, refresh, and
support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.
The distinction between the poor teachins of mundane science and our
sacred all-embracin teachin is clear to me. Human sciences dissect
everythin to comprehend it, and kill everythin to examine it. In the
holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and
life. The Trinity--the three elements of matter--are sulphur, mercury,
and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination with
salt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means of
which it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination
produces other bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence.
Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...

3rd December

Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went and
paced up and down the lare hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my
imaination pictured an occurrence of four years ao, when Dolokhov,
meetin me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I was enjoyin
perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the time I ave
him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meetin and in my
mind ave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected
myself and drove away that thouht only when I found myself lowin with
aner, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy
came and bean relatin various adventures. His comin vexed me from the
first, and I said somethin disareeable to him. He replied. I flared up
and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him. He became
silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My od, I
cannot et on with him at all. The cause of this is my eotism. I set
myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient to
my rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O od,
rant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave
so that he too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was
drowsin off I clearly heard a voice sayin in my left ear, "Thy day!"

I dreamed that I was walkin in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by
dos, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish do seized my left
thih with its teeth and would not let o. I bean to throttle it with
my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bier one, bean
bitin me. I lifted it up, but the hiher I lifted it the bier and
heavier it rew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, takin my arm, led me
to a buildin to enter which we had to pass alon a narrow plank. I
stepped on it, but it bent and ave way and I bean to clamber up a
fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After much effort I
draed myself up, so that my le hun down on one side and my body on
the other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standin on the fence and
pointin me to a broad avenue and arden, and in the arden was a lare
and beautiful buildin. I woke up. O Lord, reat Architect of Nature,
help me to tear from myself these dos--my passions especially the last,
which unites in itself the strenth of all the former ones, and aid me
to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my
dream.

7th December

I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sittin in my house, and that I was
very lad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered
incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this could
not please him, and I wished to come close to him and embrace him. But
as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had chaned and rown youn,
and he was quietly tellin me somethin about the teachin of our order,
but so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left
the room and somethin strane happened. We were sittin or lyin on the
floor. He was tellin me somethin, and I wished to show him my
sensibility, and not listenin to what he was sayin I bean picturin
to myself the condition of my inner man and the race of od sanctifyin
me. And tears came into my eyes, and I was lad he noticed this. But he
looked at me with vexation and jumped up, breakin off his remarks. I
felt abashed and asked whether what he had been sayin did not concern
me; but he did not reply, ave me a kind look, and then we suddenly
found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down
on the ede of it and I burned with lonin to caress him and lie down
too. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation? Do you
know it? I think you know it already." Abashed by this question, I
replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his head
incredulously; and even more abashed, I said that thouh I was livin
with my wife as he advised, I was not livin with her as her husband. To
this he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one's embraces and
ave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that I should
be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everythin vanished. And I awoke and
found in my mind the text from the ospel: "The life was the liht of
men. And the liht shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked youn and briht. That day I
received a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjual
duties."

9th December

I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbin heart. I saw that I
was in Moscow in my house, in the bi sittin room, and Joseph
Alexeevich came in from the drawin room. I seemed to know at once that
the process of reeneration had already taken place in him, and I rushed
to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hast
thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holdin
him in my arms, and saw that his face was youn, but that he had no hair
on his head and his features were quite chaned. And I said, "I should
have known you had I met you by chance," and I thouht to myself, "Am I
tellin the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lyin like a dead body; then
he radually recovered and went with me into my study carryin a lare
book of sheets of drawin paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered
by bowin his head. I opened the book, and on all the paes there were
excellent drawins. And in my dream I knew that these drawins
represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on its
paes I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent
arments and with a transparent body, flyin up to the clouds. And I
seemed to know that this maiden was nothin else than a representation
of the Son of Sons. And lookin at those drawins I dreamed I felt
that I was doin wron, but could not tear myself away from them. Lord,
help me! My od, if Thy forsakin me is Thy doin, Thy will be done; but
if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of
my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!




CHAPTER XI

The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved durin the two years they
had spent in the country.

Thouh Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was still
servin modestly in an obscure reiment, spendin comparatively little,
the way of life at Otradnoe--Mitenka's manaement of affairs, in
particular--was such that the debts inevitably increased every year. The
only resource obviously presentin itself to the old count was to apply
for an official post, so he had come to Petersbur to look for one and
also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.

Soon after their arrival in Petersbur Ber proposed to Vera and was
accepted.

Thouh in Moscow the Rostovs beloned to the best society without
themselves ivin it a thouht, yet in Petersbur their circle of
acquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersbur they were
provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow without
inquirin to what set they beloned, here looked down on them.

The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersbur as in Moscow,
and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country neihbors from
Otradnoe, impoverished old squires and their dauhters, Peronskaya a
maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their district postmaster
who had obtained a post in Petersbur. Amon the men who very soon
became frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersbur were Boris,
Pierre whom the count had met in the street and draed home with him,
and Ber who spent whole days at the Rostovs' and paid the eldest
dauhter, Countess Vera, the attentions a youn man pays when he intends
to propose.

Not in vain had Ber shown everybody his riht hand wounded at
Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. He
narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that
everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had
obtained two decorations for Austerlitz.

In the Finnish war he also manaed to distinuish himself. He had picked
up the scrap of a renade that had killed an aide-de-camp standin near
the commander-in-chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he had
done after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such lenth and so
insistently that everyone aain believed it had been necessary to do
this, and he received two decorations for the Finnish war also. In 1809
he was a captain in the uards, wore medals, and held some special
lucrative posts in Petersbur.

Thouh some skeptics smiled when told of Ber's merits, it could not be
denied that he was a painstakin and brave officer, on excellent terms
with his superiors, and a moral youn man with a brilliant career before
him and an assured position in society.

Four years before, meetin a erman comrade in the stalls of a Moscow
theater, Ber had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in
erman, "das soll mein Weib werden," * and from that moment had made up
his mind to marry her. Now in Petersbur, havin considered the Rostovs'
position and his own, he decided that the time had come to propose.


* "That irl shall be my wife."

Ber's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was not
flatterin to him. At first it seemed strane that the son of an obscure
Livonian entleman should propose marriae to a Countess Rostova; but
Ber's chief characteristic was such a naive and ood natured eotism
that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a ood thin,
since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was ood, indeed
excellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs were seriously embarrassed, as
the suitor could not but know; and above all, Vera was twenty-four, had
been taken out everywhere, and thouh she was certainly ood-lookin and
sensible, no one up to now had proposed to her. So they ave their
consent.

"You see," said Ber to his comrade, whom he called "friend" only
because he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have considered
it all, and should not marry if I had not thouht it all out or if it
were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and mamma are
now provided for--I have arraned that rent for them in the Baltic
Provinces--and I can live in Petersbur on my pay, and with her fortune
and my ood manaement we can et alon nicely. I am not marryin for
money--I consider that dishonorable--but a wife should brin her share
and a husband his. I have my position in the service, she has
connections and some means. In our times that is worth somethin, isn't
it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable irl, and she loves
me..."

Ber blushed and smiled.

"And I love her, because her character is sensible and very ood. Now
the other sister, thouh they are the same family, is quite different--
an unpleasant character and has not the same intellience. She is so...
you know?... Unpleasant... But my fiancee!... Well, you will be comin,"
he was oin to say, "to dine," but chaned his mind and said "to take
tea with us," and quickly doublin up his tonue he blew a small round
rin of tobacco smoke, perfectly embodyin his dream of happiness.

After the first feelin of perplexity aroused in the parents by Ber's
proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took
possession of the family, but the rejoicin was external and insincere.
In the family's feelin toward this weddin a certain awkwardness and
constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not havin loved Vera
sufficiently and of bein so ready to et her off their hands. The old
count felt this most. He would probably have been unable to state the
cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted from the state of his
affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what his debts amounted
to, or what dowry he could ive Vera. When his dauhters were born he
had assined to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three
hundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and the
other was mortaed and the interest so much in arrears that it would
have to be sold, so that it was impossible to ive it to Vera. Nor had
he any money.

Ber had already been enaed a month, and only a week remained before
the weddin, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the
question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. At one time the
count thouht of ivin her the Ryazan estate or of sellin a forest, at
another time of borrowin money on a note of hand. A few days before the
weddin Ber entered the count's study early one mornin and, with a
pleasant smile, respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let him
know what Vera's dowry would be. The count was so disconcerted by this
lon-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he ave the first reply
that came into his head. "I like your bein businesslike about it.... I
like it. You shall be satisfied...."

And pattin Ber on the shoulder he ot up, wishin to end the
conversation. But Ber, smilin pleasantly, explained that if he did not
know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at least
part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off.

"Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now without
havin definite means to maintain my wife, I should be actin badly...."

The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be enerous and to
avoid further importunity, sayin that he would ive a note of hand for
eihty thousand rubles. Ber smiled meekly, kissed the count on the
shoulder, and said that he was very rateful, but that it was impossible
for him to arrane his new life without receivin thirty thousand in
ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he added, "and then a
note of hand for only sixty thousand."

"Yes, yes, all riht!" said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, my
dear fellow, I'll ive you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eihty
thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."




CHAPTER XII

Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which she
had counted on her finers with Boris after they had kissed four years
ao. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her mother, if
Boris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that episode
as of some childish, lon-forotten matter that was not worth
mentionin. But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether
her enaement to Boris was a jest or an important, bindin promise
tormented her.

Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen the
Rostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.

Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he did not wish to see her, and
this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke
of him.

"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would say when
Boris was mentioned.

Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently, seemed
to hold herself with particular dinity, and always spoke rapturously
and ratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career on
which he had entered. When the Rostovs came to Petersbur Boris called
on them.

He drove to their house in some aitation. The memory of Natasha was his
most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of lettin
her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and
Natasha could not be bindin either on her or on him. He had a brilliant
position in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova, a
brilliant position in the service thanks to the patronae of an
important personae whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and he was
beinnin to make plans for marryin one of the richest heiresses in
Petersbur, plans which miht very easily be realized. When he entered
the Rostovs' drawin room Natasha was in her own room. When she heard of
his arrival she almost ran into the drawin room, flushed and beamin
with a more than cordial smile.

Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shinin from
under her curls and boisterous, childish lauhter, as he had known her
four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a different
Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous astonishment. This
expression on his face pleased Natasha.

"Well, do you reconize your little madcap playmate?" asked the
countess.

Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the
chane in her.

"How handsome you have rown!"

"I should think so!" replied Natasha's lauhin eyes.

"And is Papa older?" she asked.

Natasha sat down and, without joinin in Boris' conversation with the
countess, silently and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. He felt
the weiht of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and lanced at her
occasionally.

Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed were all
comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed at once.
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranin
with his riht hand the cleanest of loves that fitted his left hand
like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his
lips about the amusements of the hihest Petersbur society, recallin
with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was not
accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, when speakin of the
hihest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had attended, and to
invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.

All this time Natasha sat silent, lancin up at him from under her
brows. This aze disturbed and confused Boris more and more. He looked
round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he was sayin.
He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and took his leave. The
same inquisitive, challenin, and rather mockin eyes still looked at
him. After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracted
him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that feelin,
because to marry her, a irl almost without fortune, would mean ruin to
his career, while to renew their former relations without intendin to
marry her would be dishonorable. Boris made up his mind to avoid meetin
Natasha, but despite that resolution he called aain a few days later
and bean callin often and spendin whole days at the Rostovs'. It
seemed to him that he ouht to have an explanation with Natasha and tell
her that the old times must be forotten, that in spite of everythin...
she could not be his wife, that he had no means, and they would never
let her marry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward about
enterin on such an explanation. From day to day he became more and more
entanled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in love
with Boris as of old. She san him his favorite sons, showed him her
album, makin him write in it, did not allow him to allude to the past,
lettin it be understood how delihtful was the present; and every day
he went away in a fo, without havin said what he meant to, and not
knowin what he was doin or why he came, or how it would all end. He
left off visitin Helene and received reproachful notes from her every
day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.




CHAPTER XIII

One niht when the old countess, in nihtcap and dressin jacket,
without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showin
under her white cotton cap, knelt sihin and roanin on a ru and
bowin to the round in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also in a
dressin jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in
curlpapers, ran in. The countess--her prayerful mood dispelled--looked
round and frowned. She was finishin her last prayer: "Can it be that
this couch will be my rave?" Natasha, flushed and eaer, seein her
mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, and
unconsciously put out her tonue as if chidin herself. Seein that her
mother was still prayin she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly
slippin one little foot aainst the other, pushed off her slippers and
jumped onto the bed the countess had feared miht become her rave. This
couch was hih, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than
the one below. Natasha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled
over to the wall, and bean snulin up the bedclothes as she settled
down, raisin her knees to her chin, kickin out and lauhin almost
inaudibly, now coverin herself up head and all, and now peepin at her
mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a
stern face, but seein, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in
her kind, weak way.

"Now then, now then!" said she.

"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one on your
throat and another... that'll do!" And seizin her mother round the
neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her mother
Natasha seemed rouh, but she was so sensitive and tactful that however
she clasped her mother she always manaed to do it without hurtin her
or makin her feel uncomfortable or displeased.

"Well, what is it toniht?" said the mother, havin arraned her pillows
and waited until Natasha, after turnin over a couple of times, had
settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and
assumed a serious expression.

These visits of Natasha's at niht before the count returned from his
club were one of the reatest pleasures of both mother, and dauhter.

"What is it toniht?--But I have to tell you..."

Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth.

"About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I have come
about. Don't say it--I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand.
"Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?"

"Natasha, you are sixteen. At your ae I was married. You say Boris is
nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?... What
are you thinkin about? You have quite turned his head, I can see
that...."

As she said this the countess looked round at her dauhter. Natasha was
lyin lookin steadily straiht before her at one of the mahoany
sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the countess
only saw her dauhter's face in profile. That face struck her by its
peculiarly serious and concentrated expression.

Natasha was listenin and considerin.

"Well, what then?" said she.

"You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him? You
know you can't marry him."

"Why not?" said Natasha, without chanin her position.

"Because he is youn, because he is poor, because he is a relation...
and because you yourself don't love him."

"How do you know?"

"I know. It is not riht, darlin!"


"But if I want to..." said Natasha.

"Leave off talkin nonsense," said the countess.

"But if I want to..."

"Natasha, I am in earnest..."

Natasha did not let her finish. She drew the countess' lare hand to
her, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then aain turned it
over and bean kissin first one knuckle, then the space between the
knuckles, then the next knuckle, whisperin, "January, February, March,
April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anythin? Speak!" said she,
turnin to her mother, who was tenderly azin at her dauhter and in
that contemplation seemed to have forotten all she had wished to say.

"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand this friendship
datin from your childish days, and to see him so intimate with you may
injure you in the eyes of other youn men who visit us, and above all it
torments him for nothin. He may already have found a suitable and
wealthy match, and now he's half crazy."

"Crazy?" repeated Natasha.

"I'll tell you some thins about myself. I had a cousin..."

"I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old."

"He was not always old. But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have a
talk with Boris. He need not come so often...."

"Why not, if he likes to?"

"Because I know it will end in nothin...."

"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!" said
Natasha in the tone of one bein deprived of her property. "Well, I
won't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it." Natasha
smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but just so," she added.

"How so, my pet?"

"Just so. There's no need for me to marry him. But... just so."

"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shakin all over, she
went off into a ood humored, unexpected, elderly lauh.

"Don't lauh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shakin the whole bed!
You're awfully like me, just such another iler.... Wait..." and she
seized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finer,
sayin, "June," and continued, kissin, "July, Auust," on the other
hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you think? Was
anybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very, very
nice. Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the dinin-room
clock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--ray, liht ray..."

"What rubbish you're talkin!" said the countess.

Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas would
understand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he is
square."

"You flirt with him too," said the countess, lauhin.

"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue and
red.... How can I explain it to you?"

"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.
"You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, and
ran barefoot to her own room.

It was a lon time before she could sleep. She kept thinkin that no one
could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.

"Sonya?" she thouht, lancin at that curled-up, sleepin little kitten
with her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtuous. She
fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anythin more. Even
Mamma does not understand. It is wonderful how clever I am and how...
charmin she is," she went on, speakin of herself in the third person,
and imainin it was some very wise man--the wisest and best of men--who
was sayin it of her. "There is everythin, everythin in her,"
continued this man. "She is unusually intellient, charmin... and then
she is pretty, uncommonly pretty, and aile--she swims and rides
splendidly... and her voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"

She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herself
on her bed, lauhed at the pleasant thouht that she would immediately
fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the candle, and before
Dunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another happier
world of dreams, where everythin was as liht and beautiful as in
reality, and even more so because it was different.

Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him, after
which he ceased comin to the Rostovs'.




CHAPTER XIV

On the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an old
randee of Catherine's day was ivin a ball and midniht supper. The
diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.

The randee's well-known mansion on the Enlish Quay littered with
innumerable lihts. Police were stationed at the brihtly lit entrance
which was carpeted with red baize, and not only endarmes but dozens of
police officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.
Carriaes kept drivin away and fresh ones arrivin, with red-liveried
footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriaes emered men
wearin uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine
cautiously descended the carriae steps which were let down for them
with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baize
at the entrance.

Almost every time a new carriae drove up a whisper ran throuh the
crowd and caps were doffed.

"The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't you see
the plumes?..." was whispered amon the crowd.

One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know everyone and
mentioned by name the reatest dinitaries of the day.

A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who were
to be present, were still hurryin to et dressed.

There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the
Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive, that the
dresses would not be ready, or that somethin would not be arraned as
it should be.

Marya Inatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at the
court of the Dowaer Empress, who was a friend and relation of the
countess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersbur hih society,
was to accompany them to the ball.

They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida ardens at ten
o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the irls were not
yet dressed.

Natasha was oin to her first rand ball. She had ot up at eiht that
mornin and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. All
her powers since mornin had been concentrated on ensurin that they
all--she herself, Mamma, and Sonya--should be as well dressed as
possible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands. The
countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two irls
white auze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and their
hair dressed a la recque.

Everythin essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks, and ears
washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork silk
stockins and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on; the
hairdressin was almost done. Sonya was finishin dressin and so was
the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled about helpin them all, was
behindhand. She was still sittin before a lookin-lass with a dressin
jacket thrown over her slender shoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed in
the middle of the room and, pressin the head of a pin till it hurt her
dainty finer, was fixin on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went
throuh it.

"That's not the way, that's not the way, Sonya!" cried Natasha turnin
her head and clutchin with both hands at her hair which the maid who
was dressin it had not time to release. "That bow is not riht. Come
here!"

Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.

"Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holdin
Natasha's hair.

"Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's riht, Sonya."

"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.

"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"

"I have only my cap to pin on."

"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it riht."

"But it's already ten."

They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha had
still to et dressed and they had to call at the Taurida ardens.

When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under which
her dancin shoes showed, and in her mother's dressin jacket, ran up to
Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turnin her mother's
head this way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissin
her ray hair, ran back to the maids who were turnin up the hem of her
skirt.

The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too lon. Two
maids were turnin up the hem and hurriedly bitin off the ends of
thread. A third with pins in her mouth was runnin about between the
countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the ossamer arment
up hih on one uplifted hand.

"Mavra, quicker, darlin!"

"ive me my thimble, Miss, from there..."

"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count comin to the door. "Here
is some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waitin."

"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holdin up the shortened auze dress
with two finers, and blowin and shakin somethin off it, as if by
this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what she
held.

Natasha bean puttin on the dress.

"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her father
as he opened the door--speakin from under the filmy skirt which still
covered her whole face.

Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. He was
wearin a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockins, and was perfumed
and his hair pomaded.

"Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charmin!" cried Natasha, as she stood in
the middle of the room smoothin out the folds of the auze.

"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was
pullin the skirt straiht and shiftin the pins from one side of her
mouth to the other with her tonue.

"Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairin voice as she
looked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too lon."

Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier lass. The dress was
too lon.

"Really, madam, it is not at all too lon," said Mavra, crawlin on her
knees after her youn lady.

"Well, if it's too lon we'll tack it up... we'll tack it up in one
minute," said the resolute Dunyasha takin a needle that was stuck on
the front of her little shawl and, still kneelin on the floor, set to
work once more.

At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap
and velvet own.

"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any of
you!"

He would have embraced her but, blushin, she stepped aside fearin to
be rumpled.

"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arrane it,"
and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tackin up her skirt
could not move fast enouh and a piece of auze was torn off.

"Oh oodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"

"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.

"What a beauty--a very queen!" said the nurse as she came to the door.
"And Sonya! They are lovely!"

At a quarter past ten they at last ot into their carriaes and started.
But they had still to call at the Taurida ardens.

Peronskaya was quite ready. In spite of her ae and plainness she had
one throuh the same process as the Rostovs, but with less flurry--for
to her it was a matter of routine. Her uly old body was washed,
perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washed behind her
ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawin room in her
yellow dress, wearin her bade as maid of honor, her old lady's maid
was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs' servants had been.

She praised the Rostovs' toilets. They praised her taste and toilet, and
at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they settled
themselves in their carriaes and drove off.




CHAPTER XV

Natasha had not had a moment free since early mornin and had not once
had time to think of what lay before her.

In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swayin carriae, she
for the first time vividly imained what was in store for her there at
the ball, in those brihtly lihted rooms--with music, flowers, dances,
the Emperor, and all the brilliant youn people of Petersbur. The
prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true, so
out of keepin was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the
carriae. She understood all that awaited her only when, after steppin
over the red baize at the entrance, she entered the hall, took off her
fur cloak, and, beside Sonya and in front of her mother, mounted the
brihtly illuminated stairs between the flowers. Only then did she
remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majestic
air she considered indispensable for a irl on such an occasion. But,
fortunately for her, she felt her eyes rowin misty, she saw nothin
clearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed
at her heart. She could not assume that pose, which would have made her
ridiculous, and she moved on almost faintin from excitement and tryin
with all her miht to conceal it. And this was the very attitude that
became her best. Before and behind them other visitors were enterin,
also talkin in low tones and wearin ball dresses. The mirrors on the
landin reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, with
diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.

Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinuish her reflection
from the others. All was blended into one brilliant procession. On
enterin the ballroom the reular hum of voices, footsteps, and
reetins deafened Natasha, and the liht and litter dazzled her still
more. The host and hostess, who had already been standin at the door
for half an hour repeatin the same words to the various arrivals,
"Charme de vous voir," * reeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same
manner.


* "Delihted to see you."

The two irls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her black
hair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarily
rested loner on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and ave her alone
a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess. Lookin at
her she may have recalled the olden, irrecoverable days of her own
irlhood and her own first ball. The host also followed Natasha with his
eyes and asked the count which was his dauhter.

"Charmin!" said he, kissin the tips of his finers.

In the ballroom uests stood crowdin at the entrance doors awaitin the
Emperor. The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of
that crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several people were askin about
her and lookin at her. She realized that those noticin her liked her,
and this observation helped to calm her.

"There are some like ourselves and some worse," she thouht.

Peronskaya was pointin out to the countess the most important people at
the ball.

"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That ray-haired man," she
said, indicatin an old man with a profusion of silver-ray curly hair,
who was surrounded by ladies lauhin at somethin he said.

"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersbur, Countess Bezukhova," said
Peronskaya, indicatin Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! She is
quite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, youn and old, pay
court to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince--is quite mad
about her. But see, those two, thouh not ood-lookin, are even more
run after."

She pointed to a lady who was crossin the room followed by a very plain
dauhter.

"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "And look,
here come her suitors."

"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kurain," she said, indicatin a
handsome officer of the Horse uards who passed by them with head erect,
lookin at somethin over the heads of the ladies. "He's handsome, isn't
he? I hear they will marry him to that rich irl. But your cousin,
Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say she has millions. Oh
yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess'
inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he were a kin! All the same,
the French are charmin, very charmin. No one more charmin in society.
Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the most beautiful of them all, our
Marya Antonovna! And how simply she is dressed! Lovely! And that stout
one in spectacles is the universal Freemason," she went on, indicatin
Pierre. "Put him beside his wife and he looks a reular buffoon!"

Pierre, swayin his stout body, advanced, makin way throuh the crowd
and noddin to riht and left as casually and ood-naturedly as if he
were passin throuh a crowd at a fair. He pushed throuh, evidently
lookin for someone.

Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon,"
as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was lookin for them, and for
her in particular. He had promised to be at the ball and introduce
partners to her.

But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, dark
man of middle heiht, and in a white uniform, who stood by a window
talkin to a tall man wearin stars and a ribbon. Natasha at once
reconized the shorter and youner man in the white uniform: it was
Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have rown much youner, happier, and
better-lookin.

"There's someone else we know--Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" said
Natasha, pointin out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed a niht
with us at Otradnoe."

"Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fait a
present la pluie et le beau temps. * He's too proud for anythin. Takes
after his father. And he's hand in love with Speranski, writin some
project or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one
talkin to him and he has turned away," she said, pointin at him. "I'd
ive it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."


* "He is all the rae just now."




CHAPTER XVI

Suddenly everybody stirred, bean talkin, and pressed forward and then
back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to
the sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walked
his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowin to riht and left as
if anxious to et the first moments of the reception over. The band
played the polonaise in voue at that time on account of the words that
had been set to it, beinnin: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts you
ravish quite..." The Emperor passed on to the drawin room, the crowd
made a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces
hurried there and back aain. Then the crowd hastily retired from the
drawin-room door, at which the Emperor reappeared talkin to the
hostess. A youn man, lookin distrauht, pounced down on the ladies,
askin them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces betrayin complete
foretfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to the
detriment of their toilets. The men bean to choose partners and take
their places for the polonaise.

Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smilin out of the drawin
room leadin his hostess by the hand but not keepin time to the music.
The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then came
ambassadors, ministers, and various enerals, whom Peronskaya diliently
named. More than half the ladies already had partners and were takin
up, or preparin to take up, their positions for the polonaise. Natasha
felt that she would be left with her mother and Sonya amon a minority
of women who crowded near the wall, not havin been invited to dance.
She stood with her slender arms hanin down, her scarcely defined bosom
risin and fallin reularly, and with bated breath and litterin,
frihtened eyes azed straiht before her, evidently prepared for the
heiht of joy or misery. She was not concerned about the Emperor or any
of those reat people whom Peronskaya was pointin out--she had but one
thouht: "Is it possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be amon
the first to dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will
notice me? They do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look as
if they were sayin, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worth
lookin at her!' No, it's impossible," she thouht. "They must know how
I lon to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoy
dancin with me."

The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerable
time, had beun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears. She
wanted to cry. Peronskaya had left them. The count was at the other end
of the room. She and the countess and Sonya were standin by themselves
as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of straners, with no one
interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew with a lady
passed by, evidently not reconizin them. The handsome Anatole was
smilinly talkin to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one
looks at a wall. Boris passed them twice and each time turned away. Ber
and his wife, who were not dancin, came up to them.

This family atherin seemed humiliatin to Natasha--as if there were
nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did not
listen to or look at Vera, who was tellin her somethin about her own
reen dress.

At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced with
three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the
Rostovs requestin them to stand farther back, thouh as it was they
were already close to the wall, and from the allery resounded the
distinct, precise, enticinly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The Emperor
looked smilinly down the room. A minute passed but no one had yet beun
dancin. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to Countess
Bezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilinly raised her hand and laid
it on his shoulder without lookin at him. The aide-de-camp, an adept in
his art, raspin his partner firmly round her waist, with confident
deliberation started smoothly, lidin first round the ede of the
circle, then at the corner of the room he cauht Helene's left hand and
turned her, the only sound audible, apart from the ever-quickenin
music, bein the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid, aile feet,
while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread out and
seemed to flash as she whirled round. Natasha azed at them and was
ready to cry because it was not she who was dancin that first turn of
the waltz.

Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearin
stockins and dancin shoes, stood lookin animated and briht in the
front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff was
talkin to him about the first sittin of the Council of State to be
held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speranski
and participatin in the work of the leislative commission, could ive
reliable information about that sittin, concernin which various rumors
were current. But not listenin to what Firhoff was sayin, he was
azin now at the soverein and now at the men intendin to dance who
had not yet athered courae to enter the circle.

Prince Andrew was watchin these men abashed by the Emperor's presence,
and the women who were breathlessly lonin to be asked to dance.

Pierre came up to him and cauht him by the arm.

"You always dance. I have a proteee, the youn Rostova, here. Ask her,"
he said.

"Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turnin to the
baron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere--at a ball one must
dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated. The
despairin, dejected expression of Natasha's face cauht his eye. He
reconized her, uessed her feelins, saw that it was her debut,
remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression of
pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova.

"Allow me to introduce you to my dauhter," said the countess, with
heihtened color.

"I have the pleasure of bein already acquainted, if the countess
remembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quite
belyin Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approachin Natasha
he held out his arm to rasp her waist before he had completed his
invitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression on
Natasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenly
brihtened into a happy, rateful, childlike smile.

"I have lon been waitin for you," that frihtened happy little irl
seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as she
raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the second couple
to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of his
day and Natasha danced exquisitely. Her little feet in their white satin
dancin shoes did their work swiftly, lihtly, and independently of
herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender bare
arms and neck were not beautiful--compared to Helene's her shoulders
looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Helene seemed, as it were,
hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned
her person, while Natasha was like a irl exposed for the first time,
who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that this
was absolutely necessary.

Prince Andrew liked dancin, and wishin to escape as quickly as
possible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed to
him, wishin also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked,
caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and had chosen Natasha
because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the first
pretty irl who cauht his eye; but scarcely had he embraced that
slender supple fiure and felt her stirrin so close to him and smilin
so near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he felt
himself revived and rejuvenated when after leavin her he stood
breathin deeply and watchin the other dancers.




CHAPTER XVII

After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance, and then
the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other youn men,
so that, flushed and happy, and passin on her superfluous partners to
Sonya, she did not cease dancin all the evenin. She noticed and saw
nothin of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to notice
that the Emperor talked a lon time with the French ambassador, and how
particularly racious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-so
and So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Helene had reat
success and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so, but she
did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had one because
the ball became livelier after his departure. For one of the merry
cotillions before supper Prince Andrew was aain her partner. He
reminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue, and how
she had been unable to sleep that moonliht niht, and told her how he
had involuntarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that recollection
and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been somethin to be
ashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.

Like all men who have rown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meetin
someone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such was
Natasha, with her surprise, her deliht, her shyness, and even her
mistakes in speakin French. With her he behaved with special care and
tenderness, sittin beside her and talkin of the simplest and most
unimportant matters; he admired her shy race. In the middle of the
cotillion, havin completed one of the fiures, Natasha, still out of
breath, was returnin to her seat when another dancer chose her. She was
tired and pantin and evidently thouht of declinin, but immediately
put her hand aily on the man's shoulder, smilin at Prince Andrew.

"I'd be lad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you see how they
keep askin me, and I'm lad of it, I'm happy and I love everybody, and
you and I understand it all," and much, much more was said in her smile.
When her partner left her Natasha ran across the room to choose two
ladies for the fiure.

"If she oes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be
my wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as he
watched her. She did o first to her cousin.

"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thouht Prince Andrew, "but
what is certain is that that irl is so charmin, so oriinal, that she
won't be dancin here a month before she will be married.... Such as she
are rare here," he thouht, as Natasha, readjustin a rose that was
slippin on her bodice, settled herself beside him.

When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up to
the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and asked
his dauhter whether she was enjoyin herself. Natasha did not answer at
once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully: "How can
you ask such a question?"

"I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and Prince
Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her
father and instantly dropped aain. Natasha was happier than she had
ever been in her life. She was at that heiht of bliss when one becomes
completely kind and ood and does not believe in the possibility of
evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.

At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position
his wife occupied in court circles. He was loomy and absent-minded. A
deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standin by a window he stared
over his spectacles seein no one.

On her way to supper Natasha passed him.

Pierre's loomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.
She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of her own
happiness.

"How delihtful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it?"

Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not raspin what she said.

"Yes, I am very lad," he said.

"How can people be dissatisfied with anythin?" thouht Natasha.
"Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes all
the people at the ball alike were ood, kind, and splendid people,
lovin one another; none of them capable of injurin another--and so
they ouht all to be happy.




CHAPTER XVIII

Next day Prince Andrew thouht of the ball, but his mind did not dwell
on it lon. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then... "Yes, that
little Rostova is very charmin. There's somethin fresh, oriinal, un-
Petersbur-like about her that distinuishes her." That was all he
thouht about yesterday's ball, and after his mornin tea he set to
work.

But either from fatiue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for work
and could et nothin done. He kept criticizin his own work, as he
often did, and was lad when he heard someone comin.

The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented all
the societies in Petersbur, and a passionate devotee of the new ideas
and of Speranski, and a dilient Petersbur newsmoner--one of those men
who choose their opinions like their clothes accordin to the fashion,
but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans. Hardly
had he ot rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew's room with a
preoccupied air and at once bean talkin. He had just heard particulars
of that mornin's sittin of the Council of State opened by the Emperor,
and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's speech had been
extraordinary. It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs
deliver. "The Soverein plainly said that the Council and Senate are
estates of the realm, he said that the overnment must rest not on
authority but on secure bases. The Emperor said that the fiscal system
must be reoranized and the accounts published," recounted Bitski,
emphasizin certain words and openin his eyes sinificantly.

"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the reatest epoch in our
history," he concluded.

Prince Andrew listened to the account of the openin of the Council of
State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached
such importance, and was surprised that this event, now that it had
taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insinificant. He
listened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiastic account of it. A very
simple thouht occurred to him: "What does it matter to me or to Bitski
what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council? Can all that make me
any happier or better?"

And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest Prince
Andrew had felt in the impendin reforms. He was oin to dine that
evenin at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the host had said
when invitin him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate home
circle of the man he so admired had reatly interested Prince Andrew,
especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic
surroundins, but now he felt disinclined to o to it.

At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house Speranski
owned in the Taurida ardens. In the parqueted dinin room this small
house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suestin that of a
monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly
atherin of Speranski's intimate acquaintances already assembled at
five o'clock. There were no ladies present except Speranski's little
dauhter (lon-faced like her father) and her overness. The other
uests were ervais, Manitski, and Stolypin. While still in the
anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a rinin staccato lauh--a
lauh such as one hears on the stae. Someone--it sounded like
Speranski--was distinctly ejaculatin ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew had never
before heard Speranski's famous lauh, and this rinin, hih-pitched
lauhter from a statesman made a strane impression on him.

He entered the dinin room. The whole company were standin between two
windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres. Speranski, wearin a
ray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently still
the same waistcoat and hih white stock he had worn at the meetin of
the Council of State, stood at the table with a beamin countenance. His
uests surrounded him. Manitski, addressin himself to Speranski, was
relatin an anecdote, and Speranski was lauhin in advance at what
Manitski was oin to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room
Manitski's words were aain crowned by lauhter. Stolypin ave a deep
bass uffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese. ervais lauhed
softly with a hissin chuckle, and Speranski in a hih-pitched staccato
manner.

Still lauhin, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew.

"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." he went on,
turnin to Manitski and interruptin his story. "We have areed that
this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about business!" and
turnin aain to the narrator he bean to lauh afresh.

Prince Andrew looked at the lauhin Speranski with astonishment,
reret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was not
Speranski but someone else. Everythin that had formerly appeared
mysterious and fascinatin in Speranski suddenly became plain and
unattractive.

At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed to
consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Manitski
had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate somethin
still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relatin to the state
service, related to people in the service. It seemed that in this
company the insinificance of those people was so definitely accepted
that the only possible attitude toward them was one of ood humored
ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that mornin a deaf
dinitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thouht so too.
ervais ave a lon account of an official revision, remarkable for the
stupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stutterin, broke into the
conversation and bean excitedly talkin of the abuses that existed
under the former order of thins--threatenin to ive a serious turn to
the conversation. Manitski startin quizzin Stolypin about his
vehemence. ervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted to its
former lively tone.

Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement in
a circle of friends, and his uests, understandin his wish, tried to
enliven him and amuse themselves. But their aiety seemed to Prince
Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speranski's hih-pitched voice struck him
unpleasantly, and the incessant lauhter rated on him like a false
note. Prince Andrew did not lauh and feared that he would be a damper
on the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his bein
out of harmony with the eneral mood. They all seemed very ay.

He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his remarks were
tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he could
not jest with them.

There was nothin wron or unseemly in what they said, it was witty and
miht have been funny, but it lacked just that somethin which is the
salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thin existed.

After dinner Speranski's dauhter and her overness rose. He patted the
little irl with his white hand and kissed her. And that esture, too,
seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.

The men remained at table over their port--Enlish fashion. In the midst
of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs,
which they all areed in approvin, Prince Andrew bean to express a
contrary opinion. Speranski smiled and, with an evident wish to prevent
the conversation from takin an unpleasant course, told a story that had
no connection with the previous conversation. For a few moments all were
silent.

Havin sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of wine and,
remarkin, "Nowadays ood wine rides in a carriae and pair," passed it
to the servant and ot up. All rose and continuin to talk loudly went
into the drawin room. Two letters brouht by a courier were handed to
Speranski and he took them to his study. As soon as he had left the room
the eneral merriment stopped and the uests bean to converse sensibly
and quietly with one another.

"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returnin from his study. "A
wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Manitski immediately
assumed a pose and bean recitin some humorous verses in French which
he had composed about various well-known Petersbur people. He was
interrupted several times by applause. When the verses were finished
Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his leave.

"Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.

"I promised to o to a reception."

They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,
impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to have
expected anythin from Speranski and from any of his own activities
connected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what
Speranski was doin. That precise, mirthless lauhter ran in Prince
Andrew's ears lon after he had left the house.

When he reached home Prince Andrew bean thinkin of his life in
Petersbur durin those last four months as if it were somethin new. He
recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of his project
of army reform, which had been accepted for consideration and which they
were tryin to pass over in silence simply because another, a very poor
one, had already been prepared and submitted to the Emperor. He thouht
of the meetins of a committee of which Ber was a member. He remembered
how carefully and at what lenth everythin relatin to form and
procedure was discussed at those meetins, and how sedulously and
promptly all that related to the ist of the business was evaded. He
recalled his labors on the Leal Code, and how painstakinly he had
translated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian, and
he felt ashamed of himself. Then he vividly pictured to himself
Boucharovo, his occupations in the country, his journey to Ryazan; he
remembered the peasants and Dron the villae elder, and mentally
applyin to them the Personal Rihts he had divided into pararaphs, he
felt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such useless
work.




CHAPTER XIX

Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,
and amon them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance at
the ball. Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded the
call, he wanted to see that oriinal, eaer irl who had left such a
pleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.

Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearin a dark-blue
house dress in which Prince Andrew thouht her even prettier than in her
ball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend,
simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he had formerly juded
severely, now seemed to him to consist of excellent, simple, and kindly
people. The old count's hospitality and ood nature, which struck one
especially in Petersbur as a pleasant surprise, were such that Prince
Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he thouht, "they are
capital people, who of course have not the slihtest idea what a
treasure they possess in Natasha; but they are kindly folk and form the
best possible settin for this strikinly poetic, charmin irl,
overflowin with life!"

In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strane world completely
alien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world, that
in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonliht niht had
already beun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him no
loner and was no loner alien to him, but he himself havin entered it
found in it a new enjoyment.

After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the clavichord
and bean sinin. Prince Andrew stood by a window talkin to the ladies
and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase he ceased speakin and
suddenly felt tears chokin him, a thin he had thouht impossible for
him. He looked at Natasha as she san, and somethin new and joyful
stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time sad. He had
absolutely nothin to weep about yet he was ready to weep. What about?
His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?... His hopes
for the future?... Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden, vivid
sense of the terrible contrast between somethin infinitely reat and
illimitable within him and that limited and material somethin that he,
and even she, was. This contrast weihed on and yet cheered him while
she san.

As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how he
liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feelin that
she ouht not to have asked it. He smiled, lookin at her, and said he
liked her sinin as he liked everythin she did.

Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evenin. He went to bed from
habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Havin lit his candle
he sat up in bed, then ot up, then lay down aain not at all troubled
by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had
stepped out of a stuffy room into od's own fresh air. It did not enter
his head that he was in love with Natasha; he was not thinkin about
her, but only picturin her to himself, and in consequence all life
appeared in a new liht. "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this narrow,
confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open to me?"
said he to himself. And for the first time for a very lon while he
bean makin happy plans for the future. He decided that he must attend
to his son's education by findin a tutor and puttin the boy in his
chare, then he ouht to retire from the service and o abroad, and see
Enland, Switzerland and Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel so
much strenth and youth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was riht
when he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in order
to be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the dead bury their dead,
but while one has life one must live and be happy!" thouht he.




CHAPTER XX

One mornin Colonel Ber, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody in
Moscow and Petersbur, came to see him. Ber arrived in an immaculate
brand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his
temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair.

"I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunately she
could not rant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be more fortunate
with you," he said with a smile.

"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service."

"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Ber said this with
perfect conviction that this information could not but be areeable),
"and so I wish to arrane just a small party for my own and my wife's
friends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wished to ask the
countess and you to do me the honor of comin to tea and to supper."

Only Countess Helene, considerin the society of such people as the
Bers beneath her, could be cruel enouh to refuse such an invitation.
Ber explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a small
but select company, and why this would ive him pleasure, and why thouh
he ruded spendin money on cards or anythin harmful, he was prepared
to run into some expense for the sake of ood society--that Pierre could
not refuse, and promised to come.

"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten minutes to
eiht, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our eneral is comin. He is
very ood to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will do me the
favor."

Contrary to his habit of bein late, Pierre on that day arrived at the
Bers' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eiht.

Havin prepared everythin necessary for the party, the Bers were ready
for their uests' arrival.

In their new, clean, and liht study with its small busts and pictures
and new furniture sat Ber and his wife. Ber, closely buttoned up in
his new uniform, sat beside his wife explainin to her that one always
could and should be acquainted with people above one, because only then
does one et satisfaction from acquaintances.

"You can et to know somethin, you can ask for somethin. See how I
manaed from my first promotion." (Ber measured his life not by years
but by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am only
waitin for a vacancy to command a reiment, and have the happiness to
be your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to her
straihtened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) "And how have I
obtained all this? Chiefly by knowin how to choose my aquaintances. It
oes without sayin that one must be conscientious and methodical."

Ber smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, and
paused, reflectin that this dear wife of his was after all but a weak
woman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dinity,
what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Vera at the same time smilin with a
sense of superiority over her ood, conscientious husband, who all the
same understood life wronly, as accordin to Vera all men did. Ber,
judin by his wife, thouht all women weak and foolish. Vera, judin
only by her husband and eneralizin from that observation, supposed
that all men, thouh they understand nothin and are conceited and
selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.


* To be a man.

Ber rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lace
fichu for which he had paid a ood price, kissin her straiht on the
lips.

"The only thin is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued,
followin an unconscious sequence of ideas.

"Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live for
society."

"Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Ber, pointin to
the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.

Just then Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife lanced at one
another, both smilin with self-satisfaction, and each mentally claimin
the honor of this visit.

"This is what comes of knowin how to make acquaintances," thouht Ber.
"This is what comes of knowin how to conduct oneself."

"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertainin the uests," said
Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say to
different people."

Ber smiled aain.

"It can't be helped: men must sometimes have masculine conversation,"
said he.

They received Pierre in their small, new drawin-room, where it was
impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbin its symmetry,
neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strane that
Ber, havin enerously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchair
or of the sofa for his dear uest, but bein apparently painfully
undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settle
the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by movin a
chair for himself, and Ber and Vera immediately bean their evenin
party, interruptin each other in their efforts to entertain their
uest.

Vera, havin decided in her own mind that Pierre ouht to be entertained
with conversation about the French embassy, at once bean accordinly.
Ber, havin decided that masculine conversation was required,
interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the war
with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the eneral subject to
personal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in the
Austrian campain and the reasons why he had declined them. Thouh the
conversation was very incoherent and Vera was anry at the intrusion of
the masculine element, both husband and wife felt with satisfaction
that, even if only one uest was present, their evenin had beun very
well and was as like as two peas to every other evenin party with its
talk, tea, and lihted candles.

Before lon Boris, Ber's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade of
condescension and patronae in his treatment of Ber and Vera. After
Boris came a lady with the colonel, then the eneral himself, then the
Rostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other
evenin parties. Ber and Vera could not repress their smiles of
satisfaction at the siht of all this movement in their drawin room, at
the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustlin of dresses, and the
bowin and scrapin. Everythin was just as everybody always has it,
especially so the eneral, who admired the apartment, patted Ber on the
shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the settin out of
the table for boston. The eneral sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who was
next to himself the most important uest. The old people sat with the
old, the youn with the youn, and the hostess at the tea table, on
which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as
the Panins had at their party. Everythin was just as it was everywhere
else.




CHAPTER XXI

Pierre, as one of the principal uests, had to sit down to boston with
Count Rostov, the eneral, and the colonel. At the card table he
happened to be directly facin Natasha, and was struck by a curious
chane that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and not
only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by
her look of entle indifference to everythin around.

"What's the matter with her?" thouht Pierre, lancin at her. She was
sittin by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without lookin
at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her. After playin
out a whole suit and to his partner's deliht takin five tricks,
Pierre, hearin reetins and the steps of someone who had entered the
room while he was pickin up his tricks, lanced aain at Natasha.

"What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still reater
surprise.

Prince Andrew was standin before her, sayin somethin to her with a
look of tender solicitude. She, havin raised her head, was lookin up
at him, flushed and evidently tryin to master her rapid breathin. And
the briht low of some inner fire that had been suppressed was aain
aliht in her. She was completely transformed and from a plain irl had
aain become what she had been at the ball.

Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and
youthful expression in his friend's face.

Pierre chaned places several times durin the ame, sittin now with
his back to Natasha and now facin her, but durin the whole of the six
rubbers he watched her and his friend.

"Somethin very important is happenin between them," thouht Pierre,
and a feelin that was both joyful and painful aitated him and made him
nelect the ame.

After six rubbers the eneral ot up, sayin that it was no use playin
like that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side was talkin with
Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was sayin somethin to
Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, askin whether they
were talkin secrets, sat down beside them. Vera, havin noticed Prince
Andrew's attentions to Natasha, decided that at a party, a real evenin
party, subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessary
and, seizin a moment when Prince Andrew was alone, bean a conversation
with him about feelins in eneral and about her sister. With so
intellectual a uest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt
that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.

When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was bein carried away
by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, a
thin that rarely happened with him.

"What do you think?" Vera was sayin with an arch smile. "You are so
discernin, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at a
lance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in her
attachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself), "love a
man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what I consider
true love. What do you think, Prince?"

"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcastic
smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able to
solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that the less
attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be," he added,
and looked up at Pierre who was just approachin them.

"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera--mentionin
"our days" as people of limited intellience are fond of doin,
imainin that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of
"our days" and that human characteristics chane with the times--"in our
days a irl has so much freedom that the pleasure of bein courted often
stifles real feelin in her. And it must be confessed that Natalie is
very susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince
Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort: he was about to rise, but Vera
continued with a still more subtle smile:

"I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on, "but till
quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, Count,"
she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who, between ourselves,
was very far one in the land of tenderness..." (alludin to a map of
love much in voue at that time).

Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.

"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.

"Yes, I know him..."

"I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha?"

"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked Prince Andrew, blushin
unexpectedly.

"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Le
cousinae est un danereux voisinae. * Don't you think so?"


* "Cousinhood is a danerous neihborhood."

"Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural
liveliness he bean chaffin Pierre about the need to be very careful
with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of these
jestin remarks he rose, takin Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside.

"Well?" asked Pierre, seein his friend's strane animation with
surprise, and noticin the lance he turned on Natasha as he rose.

"I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You know
that pair of women's loves?" (He referred to the masonic loves iven
to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved.) "I...
but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strane liht in his
eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached Natasha
and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her
somethin and how she flushed as she replied.

But at that moment Ber came to Pierre and bean insistin that he
should take part in an arument between the eneral and the colonel on
the affairs in Spain.

Ber was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left his face.
The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen.
Everythin was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, the cards, the eneral
raisin his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea cakes;
only one thin was lackin that he had always seen at the evenin
parties he wished to imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversation
amon the men and a dispute about somethin important and clever. Now
the eneral had beun such a discussion and so Ber drew Pierre to it.




CHAPTER XXII

Next day, havin been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the
Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there.

Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, and
without concealin it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not only in
the soul of the frihtened yet happy and enraptured Natasha, but in the
whole house, there was a feelin of awe at somethin important that was
bound to happen. The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes
at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started some
artificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.
Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of bein in the way when
she was with them. Natasha rew pale, in a panic of expectation, when
she remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by
his timidity. She felt that he wanted to say somethin to her but could
not brin himself to do so.

In the evenin, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to
Natasha and whispered: "Well, what?"

"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anythin now! One can't talk
about that," said Natasha.

But all the same that niht Natasha, now aitated and now frihtened,
lay a lon time in her mother's bed azin straiht before her. She told
her how he had complimented her, how he told her he was oin abroad,
asked her where they were oin to spend the summer, and then how he had
asked her about Boris.

"But such a... such a... never happened to me before!" she said. "Only I
feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with him. What
does that mean? Does it mean that it's the real thin? Yes? Mamma, are
you asleep?"

"No, my love; I am frihtened myself," answered her mother. "Now o!"

"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy!
such a thin never happened to me before," she said, surprised and
alarmed at the feelin she was aware of in herself. "And could we ever
have thouht!..."

It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew
at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if she feared
this strane, unexpected happiness of meetin aain the very man she had
then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and of findin
him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.

"And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersbur while
we are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball. It
is fate. Clearly it is fate that everythin led up to this! Already
then, directly I saw him I felt somethin peculiar."

"What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them..." said
her mother, thouhtfully, referrin to some verses Prince Andrew had
written in Natasha's album.

"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his bein a widower?"

"Don't, Natasha! Pray to od. 'Marriaes are made in heaven,'" said her
mother.

"Darlin Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, sheddin
tears of joy and excitement and embracin her mother.

At that very time Prince Andrew was sittin with Pierre and tellin him
of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.

That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house. The French
ambassador was there, and a forein prince of the blood who had of late
become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies and
entlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked throuh the rooms and
struck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, and morose air.

Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depression
and had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of his
wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made a
entleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had beun to feel
oppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thouhts of the vanity
of all thins human came to him oftener than before. At the same time
the feelin he had noticed between his proteee Natasha and Prince
Andrew accentuated his loom by the contrast between his own position
and his friend's. He tried equally to avoid thinkin about his wife, and
about Natasha and Prince Andrew; and aain everythin seemed to him
insinificant in comparison with eternity; aain the question: for what?
presented itself; and he forced himself to work day and niht at masonic
labors, hopin to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward
midniht, after he had left the countess' apartments, he was sittin
upstairs in a shabby dressin own, copyin out the oriinal transaction
of the Scottish lode of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy
with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.

"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air. "And
I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with that
air of escapin from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at
their work.

Prince Andrew, with a beamin, ecstatic expression of renewed life on
his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticin his sad look,
smiled at him with the eotism of joy.

"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it yesterday
and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anythin like it
before. I am in love, my friend!"

Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sih and dumped his heavy person down on
the sofa beside Prince Andrew.

"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.

"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it, but
the feelin is stroner than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and
suffered, but I would not exchane even that torment for anythin in the
world, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can't live
without her! But can she love me?... I am too old for her.... Why don't
you speak?"

"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, risin and beinnin
to pace up and down the room. "I always thouht it.... That irl is such
a treasure... she is a rare irl.... My dear friend, I entreat you,
don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry.... And I am sure
there will not be a happier man than you."

"But what of her?"

"She loves you."

"Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smilin and lookin into
Pierre's eyes.

"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.

"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holdin him by the arm. "Do you
know the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone."

"Well, o on, o on. I am very lad," said Pierre, and his face really
chaned, his brow became smooth, and he listened ladly to Prince
Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite a
new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
to speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul. Now he
boldly and lihtly made plans for an extended future, said he could not
sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, and spoke of how he
would either make his father consent to this marriae and love her, or
would do without his consent; then he marveled at the feelin that had
mastered him as at somethin strane, apart from and independent of
himself.

"I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of
such love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feelin that
I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into two
halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, liht: the other
half is everythin where she is not, and there is all loom and
darkness...."

"Darkness and loom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understand that."

"I cannot help lovin the liht, it is not my fault. And I am very
happy! You understand me? I know you are lad for my sake."

"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, lookin at his friend with a touched and
sad expression in his eyes. The brihter Prince Andrew's lot appeared to
him, the loomier seemed his own.




CHAPTER XXIII

Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriae, and to obtain
this he started for the country next day.

His father received his son's communication with external composure, but
inward wrath. He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter his
life or introduce anythin new into it, when his own life was already
endin. "If only they would let me end my days as I want to," thouht
the old man, "then they miht do as they please." With his son, however,
he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and,
adoptin a quiet tone, discussed the whole matter.

In the first place the marriae was not a brilliant one as reards
birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no loner as youn
as he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stress
on this), while she was very youn. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
be a pity to entrust to a chit of a irl. "Fourthly and finally," the
father said, lookin ironically at his son, "I be you to put it off for
a year: o abroad, take a cure, look out as you wanted to for a erman
tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or obstinacy--as
you please--is still as reat, marry! And that's my last word on it.
Mind, the last..." concluded the prince, in a tone which showed that
nothin would make him alter his decision.

Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelins, or
his fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or that he (the old prince
himself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to his
father's wish--to propose, and postpone the weddin for a year.

Three weeks after the last evenin he had spent with the Rostovs, Prince
Andrew returned to Petersbur.

Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski all
day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.
Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowin that Prince Andrew
had one to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.

Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to o out anywhere
and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and listless; she
wept secretly at niht and did not o to her mother in the evenins. She
blushed continually and was irritable. It seemed to her that everybody
knew about her disappointment and was lauhin at her and pityin her.
Stron as was her inward rief, this wound to her vanity intensified her
misery.

Once she came to her mother, tried to say somethin, and suddenly bean
to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know why
it is bein punished.

The countess bean to soothe Natasha, who after first listenin to her
mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:

"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think about it! He
just came and then left off, left off..."

Her voice trembled, and she aain nearly cried, but recovered and went
on quietly:

"And I don't at all want to et married. And I am afraid of him; I have
now become quite calm, quite calm."

The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which she
knew had the peculiar property of conducin to cheerfulness in the
mornins, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she had
abandoned since the ball. Havin finished her mornin tea she went to
the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and
bean sinin her solfeio. When she had finished her first exercise
she stood still in the middle of the room and san a musical phrase that
particularly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as thouh she had not
expected it) to the charm of the notes reverberatin, fillin the whole
empty ballroom, and slowly dyin away; and all at once she felt
cheerful. "What's the ood of makin so much of it? Thins are nice as
it is," she said to herself, and she bean walkin up and down the room,
not steppin simply on the resoundin parquet but treadin with each
step from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair of
shoes) and listenin to the reular tap of the heel and creak of the toe
as ladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice. Passin a mirror
she lanced into it. "There, that's me!" the expression of her face
seemed to say as she cauht siht of herself. "Well, and very nice too!
I need nobody."

A footman wanted to come in to clear away somethin in the room but she
would not let him, and havin closed the door behind him continued her
walk. That mornin she had returned to her favorite mood--love of, and
deliht in, herself. "How charmin that Natasha is!" she said aain,
speakin as some third, collective, male person. "Pretty, a ood voice,
youn, and in nobody's way if only they leave her in peace." But however
much they left her in peace she could not now be at peace, and
immediately felt this.

In the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, "At home?" and
then footsteps were heard. Natasha was lookin at the mirror, but did
not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she saw
herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, thouh
she hardly heard his voice throuh the closed doors.

Pale and aitated, Natasha ran into the drawin room.

"Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mamma, it is awful, it is
unbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to do?..."

Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with an
aitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha his face
brihtened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat down
beside the sofa.

"It is lon since we had the pleasure..." bean the countess, but Prince
Andrew interrupted her by answerin her intended question, obviously in
haste to say what he had to.

"I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my
father's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I only
ot back last niht," he said lancin at Natasha; "I want to have a
talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.

The countess lowered her eyes, sihin deeply.

"I am at your disposal," she murmured.

Natasha knew that she ouht to o away, but was unable to do so:
somethin ripped her throat, and reardless of manners she stared
straiht at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.

"At once? This instant!... No, it can't be!" she thouht.

Aain he lanced at her, and that lance convinced her that she was not
mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided.

"o, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.

Natasha lanced with frihtened implorin eyes at Prince Andrew and at
her mother and went out.

"I have come, Countess, to ask for your dauhter's hand," said Prince
Andrew.

The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothin.

"Your offer..." she bean at last sedately. He remained silent, lookin
into her eyes. "Your offer..." (she rew confused) "is areeable to us,
and I accept your offer. I am lad. And my husband... I hope... but it
will depend on her...."

"I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you ive it to me?"
said Prince Andrew.

"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, and with a
mixed feelin of estranement and tenderness pressed her lips to his
forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as a
son, but felt that to her he was a straner and a terrifyin man. "I am
sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your father..."

"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express
condition of his consent that the weddin is not to take place for a
year. And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.

"It is true that Natasha is still youn, but--so lon as that?..."

"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sih.

"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.

"Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seekin her dauhter.

Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sittin on the
bed, pale and dry eyed, and was azin at the icons and whisperin
somethin as she rapidly crossed herself. Seein her mother she jumped
up and flew to her.

"Well, Mamma?... Well?..."

"o, o to him. He is askin for your hand," said the countess, coldly
it seemed to Natasha. "o... o," said the mother, sadly and
reproachfully, with a deep sih, as her dauhter ran away.

Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawin room. When she came
in and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this straner has now
become everythin to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered,
"Yes, everythin! He alone is now dearer to me than everythin in the
world." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes.

"I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"

He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression of
her face. Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?
Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"

She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.

"Do you love me?"

"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sihed loudly
and, catchin her breath more and more quickly, bean to sob.

"What is it? What's the matter?"

"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled throuh her tears, bent over
closer to him, paused for an instant as if askin herself whether she
miht, and then kissed him.

Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find in
his heart his former love for her. Somethin in him had suddenly
chaned; there was no loner the former poetic and mystic charm of
desire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fear
at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful sense of
the duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feelin, thouh
not so briht and poetic as the former, was stroner and more serious.

"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked Prince
Andrew, still lookin into her eyes.

"Is it possible that I--the 'chit of a irl,' as everybody called me,"
thouht Natasha--"is it possible that I am now to be the wife and the
equal of this strane, dear, clever man whom even my father looks up to?
Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no more playin with
life, that now I am rown up, that on me now lies a responsibility for
my every word and deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?"

"No," she replied, but she had not understood his question.

"Forive me!" he said. "But you are so youn, and I have already been
throuh so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know
yourself."

Natasha listened with concentrated attention, tryin but failin to take
in the meanin of his words.

"Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continued Prince
Andrew, "it will ive you time to be sure of yourself. I ask you to make
me happy in a year, but you are free: our enaement shall remain a
secret, and should you find that you do not love me, or should you come
to love..." said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.

"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know that from the
very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," she cried, quite
convinced that she spoke the truth.

"In a year you will learn to know yourself...."

"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizin that the
marriae was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why a
year?..."

Prince Andrew bean to explain to her the reasons for this delay.
Natasha did not hear him.

"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply, but
his face expressed the impossibility of alterin that decision.

"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and aain
burst into sobs. "I shall die, waitin a year: it's impossible, it's
awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in it a look of
commiseration and perplexity.

"No, no! I'll do anythin!" she said, suddenly checkin her tears. "I am
so happy."

The father and mother came into the room and ave the betrothed couple
their blessin.

From that day Prince Andrew bean to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha's
affianced lover.




CHAPTER XXIV

No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's enaement to Bolkonski
was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said that as he
was responsible for the delay he ouht to bear the whole burden of it;
that he had iven his word and bound himself forever, but that he did
not wish to bind Natasha and ave her perfect freedom. If after six
months she felt that she did not love him she would have full riht to
reject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear of
this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the Rostovs', but
did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover: he did not use the
familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her hand. After
their enaement, quite different, intimate, and natural relations
spran up between them. It was as if they had not known each other till
now. Both liked to recall how they had rearded each other when as yet
they were nothin to one another; they felt themselves now quite
different beins: then they were artificial, now natural and sincere. At
first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;
he seemed a man from another world, and for a lon time Natasha trained
the family to et used to him, proudly assurin them all that he only
appeared to be different, but was really just like all of them, and that
she was not afraid of him and no one else ouht to be. After a few days
they rew accustomed to him, and without restraint in his presence
pursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part. He could
talk about rural economy with the count, fashions with the countess and
Natasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya. Sometimes the
household both amon themselves and in his presence expressed their
wonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there had
been of it: Prince Andrew's comin to Otradnoe and their comin to
Petersbur, and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which her
nurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew's encounter with
Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokenin that it had to be.

In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reined which always
accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sittin
toether everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would et up and o
away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
speak of it. Natasha shared this as she did all his feelins, which she
constantly divined. Once she bean questionin him about his son. Prince
Andrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha particularly liked it in
him--and said that his son would not live with them.

"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frihtened tone.

"I cannot take him away from his randfather, and besides..."

"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately uessin his
thouht; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for findin fault
with us."

Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask his
advice about Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The old countess
sihed as she looked at them; Sonya was always ettin frihtened lest
she should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leavin them
alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew spoke (he
could tell a story very well), Natasha listened to him with pride; when
she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he azed attentively and
scrutinizinly at her. She asked herself in perplexity: "What does he
look for in me? He is tryin to discover somethin by lookin at me!
What if what he seeks in me is not there?" Sometimes she fell into one
of the mad, merry moods characteristic of her, and then she particularly
loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew lauhed. He seldom lauhed, but
when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his lauhter, and after
such a lauh she always felt nearer to him. Natasha would have been
completely happy if the thouht of the separation awaitin her and
drawin near had not terrified her, just as the mere thouht of it made
him turn pale and cold.

On the eve of his departure from Petersbur Prince Andrew brouht with
him Pierre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball. Pierre
seemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talkin to the countess, and
Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya, thereby
invitin Prince Andrew to come too. He did so.

"You have known Bezukhov a lon time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"

"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd."

And as usual when speakin of Pierre, she bean to tell anecdotes of his
absent-mindedness, some of which had even been invented about him.

"Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him from
childhood. He has a heart of old. I be you, Natalie," Prince Andrew
said with sudden seriousness--"I am oin away and heaven knows what may
happen. You may cease to... all riht, I know I am not to say that. Only
this, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not here..."

"What can happen?"

"Whatever trouble may come," Prince Andrew continued, "I be you,
Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone for
advice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but he
has a heart of old."

Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himself
could have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act on
Natasha. Flushed and aitated she went about the house all that day,
dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understandin
what awaited her. She did not even cry when, on takin leave, he kissed
her hand for the last time. "Don't o!" she said in a tone that made him
wonder whether he really ouht not to stay and which he remembered lon
afterwards. Nor did she cry when he was one; but for several days she
sat in her room dry-eyed, takin no interest in anythin and only sayin
now and then, "Oh, why did he o away?"

But a fortniht after his departure, to the surprise of those around
her, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and became
her old self aain, but with a chane in her moral physionomy, as a
child ets up after a lon illness with a chaned expression of face.




CHAPTER XXV

Durin that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's
health and temper became much worse. He rew still more irritable, and
it was Princess Mary who enerally bore the brunt of his frequent fits
of unprovoked aner. He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots so
as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had two
passions and consequently two joys--her nephew, little Nicholas, and
reliion--and these were the favorite subjects of the prince's attacks
and ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he would brin round to the
superstitiousness of old maids, or the pettin and spoilin of children.
"You want to make him"--little Nicholas--"into an old maid like
yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," he
would say. Or, turnin to Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in
Princess Mary's presence how she liked our villae priests and icons and
would joke about them.

He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelins and tormented her, but it
cost her no effort to forive him. Could he be to blame toward her, or
could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?
And what is justice? The princess never thouht of that proud word
"justice." All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear and
simple law--the law of love and self-sacrifice tauht us by Him who
lovinly suffered for mankind thouh He Himself was od. What had she to
do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
love, and that she did.

Durin the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been ay,
entle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for a
lon time past. She felt that somethin had happened to him, but he said
nothin to her about his love. Before he left he had a lon talk with
his father about somethin, and Princess Mary noticed that before his
departure they were dissatisfied with one another.

Soon after Prince Andrew had one, Princess Mary wrote to her friend
Julie Karaina in Petersbur, whom she had dreamed (as all irls dream)
of marryin to her brother, and who was at that time in mournin for her
own brother, killed in Turkey.

Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.

Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as a
special providence of od who, lovin you, wishes to try you and your
excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Reliion, and reliion alone, can--I
will not say comfort us--but save us from despair. Reliion alone can
explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for what
cause, kind and noble beins able to find happiness in life--not merely
harmin no one but necessary to the happiness of others--are called away
to od, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a burden
to themselves and to others, are left livin. The first death I saw, and
one I shall never foret--that of my dear sister-in-law--left that
impression on me. Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother had
to die, so I asked why that anel Lise, who not only never wroned
anyone, but in whose soul there were never any unkind thouhts, had to
die. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed since
then, and already I, with my petty understandin, bein to see clearly
why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression of
the infinite oodness of the Creator, whose every action, thouh
enerally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite
love for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too anelically
innocent to have the strenth to perform all a mother's duties. As a
youn wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been so as
a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly Prince
Andrew, with the purest rerets and memories, but probably she will
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak of
her alone, that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent
influence on me and on my brother in spite of all our rief. Then, at
the moment of our loss, these thouhts could not occur to me; I should
then have dismissed them with horror, but now they are very clear and
certain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you of
the ospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not a
sinle hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will is
overned only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for
our ood.

You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of my
wish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. You will be
surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case is
this: my father's health is rowin noticeably worse, he cannot stand
any contradiction and is becomin irritable. This irritability is, as
you know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot endure the
notion that Buonaparte is neotiatin on equal terms with all the
sovereins of Europe and particularly with our own, the randson of the
reat Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but
from my father's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all
that oes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred on
Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not
accepted as a reat man, still less as Emperor of France. And my father
cannot stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly because of his
political views that my father is reluctant to speak of oin to Moscow;
for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way of
expressin his views reardless of anybody. All the benefit he miht
derive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the
disputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will
be decided very shortly.

Our family life oes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew's
absence. He, as I wrote you before, has chaned very much of late. After
his sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits. He has aain
become as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with that
heart of old to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seems to me,
that life is not over for him. But toether with this mental chane he
has rown physically much weaker. He has become thinner and more
nervous. I am anxious about him and lad he is takin this trip abroad
which the doctors recommended lon ao. I hope it will cure him. You
write that in Petersbur he is spoken of as one of the most active,
cultivated, and capable of the youn men. Forive my vanity as a
relation, but I never doubted it. The ood he has done to everybody
here, from his peasants up to the entry, is incalculable. On his
arrival in Petersbur he received only his due. I always wonder at the
way rumors fly from Petersbur to Moscow, especially such false ones as
that you write about--I mean the report of my brother's betrothal to the
little Rostova. I do not think my brother will ever marry aain, and
certainly not her; and this is why: first, I know that thouh he rarely
speaks about the wife he has lost, the rief of that loss has one too
deep in his heart for him ever to decide to ive her a successor and our
little anel a stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that irl
is not the kind of irl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think
he would choose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am
runnin on too lon and am at the end of my second sheet. ood-bye, my
dear friend. May od keep you in His holy and mihty care. My dear
friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.

MARY




CHAPTER XXVI

In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letter
from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he ave her strane and
surprisin news. He informed her of his enaement to Natasha Rostova.
The whole letter breathed lovin rapture for his betrothed and tender
and confidin affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never loved
as he did now and that only now did he understand and know what life
was. He asked his sister to forive him for not havin told her of his
resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, thouh he had spoken of it
to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her
father to ive his consent, irritatin him and havin to bear the brunt
of his displeasure without attainin her object. "Besides," he wrote,
"the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now. My father
then insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half of
that period, have passed, and my resolution is firmer than ever. If the
doctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia, but
as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You know me and
my relations with Father. I want nothin from him. I have been and
always shall be independent; but to o aainst his will and arouse his
aner, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time, would
destroy half my happiness. I am now writin to him about the same
question, and be you to choose a ood moment to hand him the letter and
to let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there is
hope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months."

After lon hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary ave the
letter to her father. The next day the old prince said to her quietly:

"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't be
lon--I shall soon set him free."

The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speak
and, raisin his voice more and more, cried:

"Marry, marry, my boy!... A ood family!... Clever people, eh? Rich, eh?
Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell him
that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas'
stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't be
without a stepmother either! Only one thin, no more women are wanted in
my house--let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will o and
live with him too?" he added, turnin to Princess Mary. "o in heaven's
name! o out into the frost... the frost... the frost!"

After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter.
But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior found
expression in his treatment of his dauhter. To his former pretexts for
irony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers and
amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his dauhter. "She'll make a
splendid princess!"

And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary noticed
that her father was really associatin more and more with the
Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his
letter, but comforted him with hopes of reconcilin their father to the
idea.

Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and reliion were
Princess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that, since everyone
must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of her
heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation of
her life. This comfortin dream and hope were iven her by od's folk--
the half-witted and other pilrims who visited her without the prince's
knowlede. The loner she lived, the more experience and observation she
had of life, the reater was her wonder at the short-sihtedness of men
who seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth: toilin, sufferin,
strulin, and harmin one another, to obtain that impossible,
visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his wife, she died,
but that was not enouh: he wanted to bind his happiness to another
woman. Her father objected to this because he wanted a more
distinuished and wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struled and
suffered and tormented one another and injured their souls, their
eternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure but for an
instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of od,
came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is
a probation; yet we clin to it and think to find happiness in it. "How
is it that no one realizes this?" thouht Princess Mary. "No one except
these despised od's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the back
door, afraid of bein seen by the prince, not for fear of ill-usae by
him but for fear of causin him to sin. To leave family, home, and all
the cares of worldly welfare, in order without clinin to anythin to
wander in hempen ras from place to place under an assumed name, doin
no one any harm but prayin for all--for those who drive one away as
well as for those who protect one: hiher than that life and truth there
is no life or truth!"

There was one pilrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty called
Theodosia, who for over thirty years had one about barefoot and worn
heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when in
a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talkin of
her life, the thouht that Theodosia alone had found the true path of
life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved to
become a pilrim herself. When Theodosia had one to sleep Princess Mary
thouht about this for a lon time, and at last made up her mind that,
strane as it miht seem, she must o on a pilrimae. She disclosed
this thouht to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the monk,
and he approved of her intention. Under uise of a present for the
pilrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilrim's complete costume for
herself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a rouh coat, and a black kerchief.
Often, approachin the chest of drawers containin this secret treasure,
Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time had not already come to
put her project into execution.

Often, listenin to the pilrims' tales, she was so stimulated by their
simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meanin,
that several times she was on the point of abandonin everythin and
runnin away from home. In imaination she already pictured herself by
Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse ras, walkin with a staff, a wallet
on her back, alon the dusty road, directin her wanderins from one
saint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and
reachin at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sihin, but
eternal joy and bliss.

"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before havin time to et
used to it or ettin to love it, I shall o farther. I will o on till
my les fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last
reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor
sihin..." thouht Princess Mary.

But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko
(Nicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she
was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than od.

BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11




CHAPTER I

The Bible leend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was a
condition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man has
retained a love of idleness, but the curse weihs on the race not only
because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but because
our moral nature is such that we cannot be both idle and at ease. An
inner voice tells us we are in the wron if we are idle. If man could
find a state in which he felt that thouh idle he was fulfillin his
duty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitive
blessedness. And such a state of obliatory and irreproachable idleness
is the lot of a whole class--the military. The chief attraction of
military service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory and
irreproachable idleness.

Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when,
after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pavlorad reiment, in which he
already commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov.

Rostov had become a bluff, ood-natured fellow, whom his Moscow
acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well
contented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from home
more frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were fallin
into reater and reater disorder, and that it was time for him to come
back to ladden and comfort his old parents.

Readin these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wantin to take
him away from surroundins in which, protected from all the
entanlements of life, he was livin so calmly and quietly. He felt that
sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, with
its embarrassments and affairs to be straihtened out, its accounts with
stewards, quarrels, and intriues, its ties, society, and with Sonya's
love and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully difficult and
complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters in
French, beinnin: "My dear Mamma," and endin: "Your obedient son,"
which said nothin of when he would return. In 1810 he received letters
from his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's enaement to
Bolkonski, and that the weddin would be in a year's time because the
old prince made difficulties. This letter rieved and mortified
Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom he
cared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to the
home; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he reretted not to
have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him
was no such reat honor after all, and that if he loved Natasha he miht
dispense with permission from his dotard father. For a moment he
hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natasha
before she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and considerations
about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas aain
put it off. But in the sprin of that year, he received a letter from
his mother, written without his father's knowlede, and that letter
persuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and take
matters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and they
would all have to o bein. The count was so weak, and trusted Mitenka
so much, and was so ood-natured, that everybody took advantae of him
and thins were oin from bad to worse. "For od's sake, I implore you,
come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family
wretched," wrote the countess.

This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a matter-of-
fact man which showed him what he ouht to do.

The riht thin now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rate
to o home on leave. Why he had to o he did not know; but after his
after-dinner nap he ave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely vicious
ray stallion that had not been ridden for a lon time, and when he
returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka
(Denisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades who
turned up in the evenin that he was applyin for leave and was oin
home. Difficult and strane as it was for him to reflect that he would
o away without havin heard from the staff--and this interested him
extremely--whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the
Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers; strane as it was to think
that he would o away without havin sold his three roans to the Polish
Count olukhovski, who was barainin for the horses Rostov had betted
he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it seemed
that the ball the hussars were ivin in honor of the Polish
Mademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the uhlans who had iven
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place
without him--he knew he must o away from this ood, briht world to
somewhere where everythin was stupid and confused. A week later he
obtained his leave. His hussar comrades--not only those of his own
reiment, but the whole briade--ave Rostov a dinner to which the
subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were two
bands and two choirs of siners. Rostov danced the Trepak with Major
Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov; the
soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!" and
then they put him in his sleih and escorted him as far as the first
post station.

Durin the first half of the journey--from Kremenchu to Kiev--all
Rostov's thouhts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, with the
squadron; but when he had one more than halfway he bean to foret his
three roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and to wonder anxiously
how thins would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there. Thouhts
of home rew stroner the nearer he approached it--far stroner, as
thouh this feelin of his was subject to the law by which the force of
attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance. At
the last post station before Otradnoe he ave the driver a three-ruble
tip, and on arrivin he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of
his home.

After the rapture of meetin, and after that odd feelin of unsatisfied
expectation--the feelin that "everythin is just the same, so why did I
hurry?"--Nicholas bean to settle down in his old home world. His father
and mother were much the same, only a little older. What was new in them
was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there used not to
be, and which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the bad state of
their affairs. Sonya was nearly twenty; she had stopped rowin prettier
and promised nothin more than she was already, but that was enouh. She
exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned, and the
faithful, unalterable love of this irl had a laddenin effect on him.
Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a bi handsome boy
of thirteen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that was
already breakin. As for Natasha, for a lon while Nicholas wondered and
lauhed whenever he looked at her.

"You're not the same at all," he said.

"How? Am I ulier?"

"On the contrary, but what dinity? A princess!" he whispered to her.

"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.

She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to
Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.

"Well, are you lad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happy now."

"Very lad," answered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... And are
you very much in love?"

"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris, with
my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel at
peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and I am
calm and contented now. Not at all as before."

Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriae
for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, provin
to him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thin
to enter a family aainst the father's will, and that she herself wished
it so.

"You don't at all understand," she said.

Nicholas was silent and areed with her.

Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at all
like a irl in love and parted from her affianced husband. She was even-
tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. This amazed Nicholas
and even made him reard Bolkonski's courtship skeptically. He could not
believe that her fate was sealed, especially as he had not seen her with
Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was somethin not
quite riht about this intended marriae.

"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thouht. Once, when he had
touched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his surprise
and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she too
had doubts about this marriae.

"You see he writes," said she, showin her son a letter of Prince
Andrew's, with that latent rude a mother always has in reard to a
dauhter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't come
before December. What can be keepin him? Illness, probably! His health
is very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attach importance to her
bein so briht: that's because she's livin throuh the last days of
her irlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter
from him! However, od rant that everythin turns out well!" (She
always ended with these words.) "He is an excellent man!"




CHAPTER II

After reachin home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull. He was
worried by the impendin necessity of interferin in the stupid business
matters for which his mother had called him home. To throw off this
burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he
went, anry and scowlin and without answerin questions as to where he
was oin, to Mitenka's lode and demanded an account of everythin. But
what an account of everythin miht be Nicholas knew even less than the
frihtened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversation and the examination
of the accounts with Mitenka did not last lon. The villae elder, a
peasant deleate, and the villae clerk, who were waitin in the
passae, heard with fear and deliht first the youn count's voice
roarin and snappin and risin louder and louder, and then words of
abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.

"Robber!... Unrateful wretch!... I'll hack the do to pieces! I'm not
my father!... Robbin us!..." and so on.

Then with no less fear and deliht they saw how the youn count, red in
the face and with bloodshot eyes, draed Mitenka out by the scruff of
the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with reat aility
at convenient moments between the words, shoutin, "Be off! Never let me
see your face here aain, you villain!"

Mitenka flew headlon down the six steps and ran away into the
shrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refue for culprits
at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returnin tipsy from the town, used to
hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe, hidin from Mitenka,
knew of its protective qualities.)

Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frihtened
faces out of the door of a room where a briht samovar was boilin and
where the steward's hih bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.

The youn count paid no heed to them, but, breathin hard, passed by
with resolute strides and went into the house.

The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the
lode, was calmed by the thouht that now their affairs would certainly
improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this
excitement miht have on her son. She went several times to his door on
tiptoe and listened, as he lihted one pipe after another.

Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed
smile, said to him:

"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you ot excited! Mitenka has
told me all about it."

"I knew," thouht Nicholas, "that I should never understand anythin in
this crazy world."

"You were anry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But they were
carried forward--and you did not look at the other pae."

"Papa, he is a blackuard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have
done, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him aain."

"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he had
mismanaed his wife's property and was to blame toward his children, but
he did not know how to remedy it). "No, I be you to attend to the
business. I am old. I..."

"No, Papa. Forive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. I understand
it all less than you do."

"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryins forward
from pae to pae," he thouht. "I used to understand what a 'corner'
and the stakes at cards meant, but carryin forward to another pae I
don't understand at all," said he to himself, and after that he did not
meddle in business affairs. But once the countess called her son and
informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for
two thousand rubles, and asked him what he thouht of doin with it.

"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I don't like
Anna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they were our friends and
poor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and by so doin caused
the old countess to weep tears of joy. After that, youn Rostov took no
further part in any business affairs, but devoted himself with
passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit--the chase--for
which his father kept a lare establishment.




CHAPTER III

The weather was already rowin wintry and mornin frosts conealed an
earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened and its
briht reen stood out sharply aainst the brownish strips of winter rye
trodden down by the cattle, and aainst the pale-yellow stubble of the
sprin buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the copses, which at the end of
Auust had still been reen islands amid black fields and stubble, had
become olden and briht-red islands amid the reen winter rye. The
hares had already half chaned their summer coats, the fox cubs were
beinnin to scatter, and the youn wolves were bier than dos. It was
the best time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent youn
sportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition, but were
so jaded that at a meetin of the huntsmen it was decided to ive them a
three days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to o on a
distant expedition, startin from the oak rove where there was an
undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.

All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air was
sharp, but toward evenin the sky became overcast and it bean to thaw.
On the fifteenth, when youn Rostov, in his dressin own, looked out of
the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable mornin for huntin: it was
as if the sky were meltin and sinkin to the earth without any wind.
The only motion in the air was that of the drippin, microscopic
particles of drizzlin mist. The bare twis in the arden were hun with
transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves. The earth in
the kitchen arden looked wet and black and listened like poppy seed
and at a short distance mered into the dull, moist veil of mist.
Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. There was a smell of
decayin leaves and of do. Milka, a black-spotted, broad-haunched bitch
with prominent black eyes, ot up on seein her master, stretched her
hind les, lay down like a hare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked
him riht on his nose and mustache. Another borzoi, a do, catchin
siht of his master from the arden path, arched his back and, rushin
headlon toward the porch with lifted tail, bean rubbin himself
aainst his les.

"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's call which
unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the corner
came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a ray, wrinkled old
man with hair cut straiht over his forehead, Ukrainian fashion, a lon
bent whip in his hand, and that look of independence and scorn of
everythin that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his Circassian cap
to his master and looked at him scornfully. This scorn was not offensive
to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, disdainful of everybody
and who considered himself above them, was all the same his serf and
huntsman.

"Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the siht of the weather,
the hounds, and the huntsman that he was bein carried away by that
irresistible passion for sport which makes a man foret all his previous
resolutions, as a lover forets in the presence of his mistress.

"What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deep bass, deep
as a proto-deacon's and hoarse with hallooin--and two flashin black
eyes azed from under his brows at his master, who was silent. "Can you
resist it?" those eyes seemed to be askin.

"It's a ood day, eh? For a hunt and a allop, eh?" asked Nicholas,
scratchin Milka behind the ears.

Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.

"I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after a minute's
pause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure. They were
howlin there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom they both
knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small place a
mile and a half from the house.)

"We ouht to o, don't you think so?" said Nicholas. "Come to me with
Uvarka."

"As you please."

"Then put off feedin them."

"Yes, sir."

Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standin in Nicholas' bi
study. Thouh Daniel was not a bi man, to see him in a room was like
seein a horse or a bear on the floor amon the furniture and
surroundins of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood
just inside the door, tryin to speak softly and not move, for fear of
breakin somethin in the master's apartment, and he hastened to say all
that was necessary so as to et from under that ceilin, out into the
open under the sky once more.

Havin finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that
the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to o huntin), Nicholas
ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was about to o
Natasha came in with rapid steps, not havin done up her hair or
finished dressin and with her old nurse's bi shawl wrapped round her.
Petya ran in at the same time.

"You are oin?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya said you
wouldn't o, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you couldn't
help oin."

"Yes, we are oin," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, as he
intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha and Petya.
"We are oin, but only wolf huntin: it would be dull for you."

"You know it is my reatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair; you
are oin by yourself, are havin the horses saddled and said nothin to
us about it."

"'No barrier bars a Russian's path'--we'll o!" shouted Petya.

"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha.

"Yes, I'll o. I shall certainly o," said Natasha decisively. "Daniel,
tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dos," she
added to the huntsman.

It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but to
have anythin to do with a youn lady seemed to him impossible. He cast
down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,
careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the youn
lady.




CHAPTER IV

The old count, who had always kept up an enormous huntin establishment
but had now handed it all completely over to his son's care, bein in
very ood spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to o out
with the others.

In an hour's time the whole huntin party was at the porch. Nicholas,
with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for
attendin to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who were tryin to
tell him somethin. He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent a
pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted his
chestnut Donets, and whistlin to his own leash of borzois, set off
across the threshin round to a field leadin to the Otradnoe wood. The
old count's horse, a sorrel eldin called Viflyanka, was led by the
room in attendance on him, while the count himself was to drive in a
small trap straiht to a spot reserved for him.

They were takin fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants and
whippers-in. Besides the family, there were eiht borzoi kennelmen and
more than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash
belonin to members of the family, there were about a hundred and
thirty dos and twenty horsemen.

Each do knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his
business, his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed the
fence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,
alon the road and field leadin to the Otradnoe covert.

The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and then
splashin into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still
seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, the air was
still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman, the
snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of a stralin
hound could be heard.

When they had one a little less than a mile, five more riders with dos
appeared out of the mist, approachin the Rostovs. In front rode a
fresh-lookin, handsome old man with a lare ray mustache.

"ood mornin, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.

"That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," bean "Uncle." (He was a
distant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their
neihbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a ood
thin you're oin. That's it! Come on!" (This was "Uncle's" favorite
expression.) "Take the covert at once, for my irchik says the Ilains
are at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... They'll take
the cubs from under your very nose."

"That's where I'm oin. Shall we join up our packs?" asked Nicholas.

The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholas rode on
side by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eaer
face and shinin eyes, alloped up to them. She was followed by Petya
who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a room
appointed to look after her. Petya, who was lauhin, whipped and pulled
at his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchik
and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.

"Uncle" looked round disapprovinly at Petya and Natasha. He did not
like to combine frivolity with the serious business of huntin.

"ood mornin, Uncle! We are oin too!" shouted Petya.

"ood mornin, ood mornin! But don't o overridin the hounds," said
"Uncle" sternly.

"Nicholas, what a fine do Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,
referrin to her favorite hound.

"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'do,' but a harrier," thouht
Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, tryin to make her feel the
distance that ouht to separate them at that moment. Natasha understood
it.

"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said. "We'll o
to our places and won't bude."

"A ood thin too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind you don't
fall off your horse," he added, "because--that's it, come on!--you've
nothin to hold on to."

The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in siht a few hundred yards off,
the huntsmen were already nearin it. Rostov, havin finally settled
with "Uncle" where they should set on the hounds, and havin shown
Natasha where she was to stand--a spot where nothin could possibly run
out--went round above the ravine.

"Well, nephew, you're oin for a bi wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind and
don't let her slip!"

"That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he shouted,
answerin "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was a
shay old do with a hanin jowl, famous for havin tackled a bi wolf
unaided. They all took up their places.

The old count, knowin his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not to
be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
Ilya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quiverin cheeks, drove up with
his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,
where a wolf miht come out. Havin straihtened his coat and fastened
on his huntin knives and horn, he mounted his ood, sleek, well-fed,
and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turnin ray, like himself.
His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov, thouh not at
heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well, and rode to the
bushy ede of the road where he was to stand, arraned his reins,
settled himself in the saddle, and, feelin that he was ready, looked
about with a smile.

Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horseman
now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three formidable
wolfhounds, who had, however, rown fat like their master and his horse.
Two wise old dos lay down unleashed. Some hundred paces farther alon
the ede of the wood stood Mitka, the count's other room, a darin
horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, by old custom, the
count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snack, and
washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.

He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were
rather moist and littered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,
wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for an
outin.

The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, havin ot everythin ready, kept
lancin at his master with whom he had lived on the best of terms for
thirty years, and understandin the mood he was in expected a pleasant
chat. A third person rode up circumspectly throuh the wood (it was
plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. This
person was a ray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall peaked
cap on his head. He was the buffoon, who went by a woman's name,
Nastasya Ivanovna.

"Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!" whispered the count, winkin at him. "If you
scare away the beast, Daniel'll ive it you!"

"I know a thin or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.

"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen the
youn countess?" he asked. "Where is she?"

"With youn Count Peter, by the Zharov rank rass," answered Simon,
smilin. "Thouh she's a lady, she's very fond of huntin."

"And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count.
"She's as ood as many a man!"

"Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!"

"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"

"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so well
that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, well knowin
what would please his master.

"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?"

"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank rass by the
Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a siht
when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rubles
and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to
find another as smart."

"To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not
said more. "To search far," he said, turnin back the skirt of his coat
to et at his snuffbox.

"The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michael
Sidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had
distinctly cauht the music of the hunt with only two or three hounds
ivin tonue. He bent down his head and listened, shakin a warnin
finer at his master. "They are on the scent of the cubs..." he
whispered, "straiht to the Lyadov uplands."

The count, forettin to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into
the distance straiht before him, down the narrow open space, holdin
the snuffbox in his hand but not takin any. After the cry of the hounds
came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's huntin horn; the
pack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard in full cry,
with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after a
wolf. The whippers-in no loner set on the hounds, but chaned to the
cry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel's voice, now a deep
bass, now piercinly shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood and
carried far beyond out into the open field.

After listenin a few moments in silence, the count and his attendant
convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: the
sound of the larer pack, eaerly ivin tonue, bean to die away in
the distance, the other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and it
was with this that Daniel's voice was heard callin ulyulyu. The sounds
of both packs minled and broke apart aain, but both were becomin more
distant.

Simon sihed and stooped to straihten the leash a youn borzoi had
entanled; the count too sihed and, noticin the snuffbox in his hand,
opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to a borzoi that was
pushin forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped the
snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up. The count and
Simon were lookin at him.

Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenly
approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuin were just
in front of them.

The count turned and saw on his riht Mitka starin at him with eyes
startin out of his head, raisin his cap and pointin before him to the
other side.

"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showin that he had lon
fretted to utter that word, and lettin the borzois slip he alloped
toward the count.

The count and Simon alloped out of the wood and saw on their left a
wolf which, softly swayin from side to side, was comin at a quiet lope
farther to the left to the very place where they were standin. The
anry borzois whined and ettin free of the leash rushed past the
horses' feet at the wolf.

The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dos awkwardly,
like a man sufferin from the quinsy, and, still slihtly swayin from
side to side, ave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail
disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a cry
like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, spran
helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across
the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazel
bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared,
dark with sweat. On its lon back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless,
his disheveled ray hair hanin over his flushed, perspirin face.

"Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he cauht siht of the count
his eyes flashed lihtnin.

"Blast you!" he shouted, holdin up his whip threateninly at the count.

"You've let the wolf o!... What sportsmen!" and as if scornin to say
more to the frihtened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heavin
flanks of his sweatin chestnut eldin with all the aner the count had
aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punished
schoolboy, looked round, tryin by a smile to win Simon's sympathy for
his pliht. But Simon was no loner there. He was allopin round by the
bushes while the field was comin up on both sides, all tryin to head
the wolf, but it vanished into the wood before they could do so.




CHAPTER V

Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post, waitin for the wolf. By
the way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries of the dos whose
notes were familiar to him, by the way the voices of the huntsmen
approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happenin at the
copse. He knew that youn and old wolves were there, that the hounds had
separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was bein chased, and
that somethin had one wron. He expected the wolf to come his way any
moment. He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and from
what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it. Hope
alternated with despair. Several times he addressed a prayer to od that
the wolf should come his way. He prayed with that passionate and
shamefaced feelin with which men pray at moments of reat excitement
arisin from trivial causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this for
me?" he said to od. "I know Thou art reat, and that it is a sin to ask
this of Thee, but for od's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let
Karay sprin at it--in siht of 'Uncle' who is watchin from over there-
-and seize it by the throat in a death rip!" A thousand times durin
that half-hour Rostov cast eaer and restless lances over the ede of
the wood, with the two scray oaks risin above the aspen underrowth
and the ully with its water-worn side and "Uncle's" cap just visible
above the bush on his riht.

"No, I shan't have such luck," thouht Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it be
worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am always
unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and
clearly throuh his mind. "Only once in my life to et an old wolf, I
want only that!" thouht he, strainin eyes and ears and lookin to the
left and then to the riht and listenin to the slihtest variation of
note in the cries of the dos.

Aain he looked to the riht and saw somethin runnin toward him across
the deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thouht Rostov, takin a deep
breath, as a man does at the comin of somethin lon hoped for. The
heiht of happiness was reached--and so simply, without warnin, or
noise, or display, that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remained
in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over
a ully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a ray back and
bi reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feelin sure that no
one saw her. Rostov, holdin his breath, looked round at the borzois.
They stood or lay not seein the wolf or understandin the situation.
Old Karay had turned his head and was anrily searchin for fleas,
barin his yellow teeth and snappin at his hind les.

"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, poutin his lips. The borzois jumped up,
jerkin the rins of the leashes and prickin their ears. Karay finished
scratchin his hindquarters and, cockin his ears, ot up with quiverin
tail from which tufts of matted hair hun down.

"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolf
approached him comin from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's whole
physionomy chaned: she shuddered, seein what she had probably never
seen before--human eyes fixed upon her--and turnin her head a little
toward Rostov, she paused.

"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed to say to
herself, and she moved forward without aain lookin round and with a
quiet, lon, easy yet resolute lope.

"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own accord
his ood horse darted headlon downhill, leapin over ullies to head
off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, runnin faster still. Nicholas
did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was allopin, nor see the
borzois, nor the round over which he went: he saw only the wolf, who,
increasin her speed, bounded on in the same direction alon the hollow.
The first to come into view was Milka, with her black markins and
powerful quarters, ainin upon the wolf. Nearer and nearer... now she
was ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face her, and instead
of puttin on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail
and stiffened her foreles.

"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.

The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, spran impetuously
at the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, but immediately jumped
aside in terror. The wolf crouched, nashed her teeth, and aain rose
and bounded forward, followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all
the borzois, who did not et any closer to her.

"She'll et away! No, it's impossible!" thouht Nicholas, still shoutin
with a hoarse voice.

"Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, lookin round for the old borzoi who
was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strenth ae had left him,
stretched himself to the utmost and, watchin the wolf, alloped heavily
aside to intercept it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and the
borzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karay had miscalculated.
Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where the
wolf would certainly escape should she reach it. But, comin toward him,
he saw hounds and a huntsman allopin almost straiht at the wolf.
There was still hope. A lon, yellowish youn borzoi, one Nicholas did
not know, from another leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf from in
front and almost knocked her over. But the wolf jumped up more quickly
than anyone could have expected and, nashin her teeth, flew at the
yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercin yelp, fell with its head on the
round, bleedin from a ash in its side.

"Karay? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.

Thanks to the delay caused by this crossin of the wolf's path, the old
do with its felted hair hanin from its thih was within five paces of
it. As if aware of her daner, the wolf turned her eyes on Karay, tucked
her tail yet further between her les, and increased her speed. But here
Nicholas only saw that somethin happened to Karay--the borzoi was
suddenly on the wolf, and they rolled toether down into a ully just in
front of them.

That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf strulin in the ully with
the dos, while from under them could be seen her ray hair and
outstretched hind le and her frihtened chokin head, with her ears
laid back (Karay was pinnin her by the throat), was the happiest moment
of his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was ready to dismount
and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from amon that
mass of dos, and then her forepaws were on the ede of the ully. She
clicked her teeth (Karay no loner had her by the throat), leaped with a
movement of her hind les out of the ully, and havin disenaed
herself from the dos, with tail tucked in aain, went forward. Karay,
his hair bristlin, and probably bruised or wounded, climbed with
difficulty out of the ully.

"Oh my od! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair.

"Uncle's" huntsman was allopin from the other side across the wolf's
path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance. She was
aain hemmed in.

Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, were all
ridin round the wolf, cryin "ulyulyu!" shoutin and preparin to
dismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and startin forward
aain every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where she
would be safe.

Already, at the beinnin of this chase, Daniel, hearin the ulyulyuin,
had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checked
his horse, supposin the affair to be over. But when he saw that the
horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran for
safety, Daniel set his chestnut allopin, not at the wolf but straiht
toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off. As a
result of this, he alloped up to the wolf just when she had been
stopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.

Daniel alloped up silently, holdin a naked daer in his left hand and
thrashin the laborin sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as if
it were a flail.

Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathin
heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniel
lyin on the wolf's back amon the dos, tryin to seize her by the
ears. It was evident to the dos, the hunters, and to the wolf herself
that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and
tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took
a step, and with his whole weiht, as if lyin down to rest, fell on the
wolf, seizin her by the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, but
Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'll a her!" and, chanin his position,
set his foot on the wolf's neck. A stick was thrust between her jaws and
she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her les were bound
toether, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.

With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shyin
and snortin horse and, accompanied by the dos yelpin at her, took her
to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had killed two of
the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled with their booty
and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with her
broad-browed head hanin down and the bitten stick between her jaws,
azed with reat lassy eyes at this crowd of dos and men surroundin
her. When she was touched, she jerked her bound les and looked wildly
yet simply at everybody. Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the
wolf.

"Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" he asked
Daniel, who was standin near.

"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffin his cap.

The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with
Daniel.

"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.

For sole reply Daniel ave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiable
smile.




CHAPTER VI

The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return very
soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. At midday they
put the hounds into a ravine thickly overrown with youn trees.
Nicholas standin in a fallow field could see all his whips.

Facin him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone
in a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been loosed
before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, ivin tonue at intervals;
other hounds joined in, now pausin and now aain ivin tonue. A
moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had been
found, and the whole pack, joinin toether, rushed alon the ravine
toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.

He saw the whips in their red caps allopin alon the ede of the
ravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expectin a fox to show itself
at any moment on the ryefield opposite.

The huntsman standin in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, and
Nicholas saw a queer, short-leed red fox with a fine brush oin hard
across the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close to
the fox which bean to dode between the field in sharper and sharper
curves, trailin its brush, when suddenly a strane white borzoi dashed
in followed by a black one, and everythin was in confusion; the borzois
formed a star-shaped fiure, scarcely swayin their bodies and with
tails turned away from the center of the roup. Two huntsmen alloped up
to the dos; one in a red cap, the other, a straner, in a reen coat.

"What's this?" thouht Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? He is not
'Uncle's' man."

The huntsmen ot the fox, but stayed there a lon time without strappin
it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with hih saddles, stood
near them and there too the dos were lyin. The huntsmen waved their
arms and did somethin to the fox. Then from that spot came the sound of
a horn, with the sinal areed on in case of a fiht.

"That's Ilain's huntsman havin a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas'
room.

Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rode at a
footpace to the place where the whips were ettin the hounds toether.
Several of the field alloped to the spot where the fiht was oin on.

Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up,
stopped near the hounds, waitin to see how the matter would end. Out of
the bushes came the huntsman who had been fihtin and rode toward his
youn master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While still at a
distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but he was
pale and breathless and his face was anry. One of his eyes was black,
but he probably was not even aware of it.

"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.

"A likely thin, killin a fox our dos had hunted! And it was my ray
bitch that cauht it! o to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! I
ave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a taste
of this?..." said the huntsman, pointin to his daer and probably
imainin himself still speakin to his foe.

Nicholas, not stoppin to talk to the man, asked his sister and Petya to
wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ilain's, huntin
party was.

The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,
surrounded by inquirin sympathizers, recounted his exploits.

The facts were that Ilain, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and were
at law, hunted over places that beloned by custom to the Rostovs, and
had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the Rostovs
were huntin and let his man snatch a fox their dos had chased.

Nicholas, thouh he had never seen Ilain, with his usual absence of
moderation in judment, hated him cordially from reports of his
arbitrariness and violence, and rearded him as his bitterest foe. He
rode in anry aitation toward him, firmly raspin his whip and fully
prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish his
enemy.

Hardly had he passed an anle of the wood before a stout entleman in a
beaver cap came ridin toward him on a handsome raven-black horse,
accompanied by two hunt servants.

Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilain a stately and courteous
entleman who was particularly anxious to make the youn count's
acquaintance. Havin ridden up to Nicholas, Ilain raised his beaver cap
and said he much reretted what had occurred and would have the man
punished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else's
borzois. He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invited
him to draw his covert.

Natasha, afraid that her brother would do somethin dreadful, had
followed him in some excitement. Seein the enemies exchanin friendly
reetins, she rode up to them. Ilain lifted his beaver cap still
hiher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the youn
countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in her
beauty, of which he had heard much.

To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilain pressed the Rostovs to come to
an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself and
which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas areed, and the hunt, now
doubled, moved on.

The way to Iliin's upland was across the fields. The hunt servants fell
into line. The masters rode toether. "Uncle," Rostov, and Ilain kept
stealthily lancin at one another's dos, tryin not to be observed by
their companions and searchin uneasily for rivals to their own borzois.

Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small, pure-bred, red-
spotted bitch on Ilain's leash, slender but with muscles like steel, a
delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of the swiftness
of Ilain's borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own
Milka.

In the middle of a sober conversation beun by Ilain about the year's
harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.

"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is she swift?"

"That one? Yes, she's a ood do, ets what she's after," answered
Ilain indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a year
before, he had iven a neihbor three families of house serfs. "So in
your parts, too, the harvest is nothin to boast of, Count?" he went on,
continuin the conversation they had beun. And considerin it polite to
return the youn count's compliment, Ilain looked at his borzois and
picked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth. "That
black-spotted one of yours is fine--well shaped!" said he.

"Yes, she's fast enouh," replied Nicholas, and thouht: "If only a
full-rown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sort of
borzoi she is," and turnin to his room, he said he would ive a ruble
to anyone who found a hare.

"I don't understand," continued Ilain, "how some sportsmen can be so
jealous about ame and dos. For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoy
ridin in company such as this... what could be better?" (he aain
raised his cap to Natasha) "but as for countin skins and what one
takes, I don't care about that."

"Of course not!"

"Or bein upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catches
somethin. All I care about is to enjoy seein the chase, is it not so,
Count? For I consider that..."

"A-tu!" came the lon-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in, who
had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holdin his whip aloft,
and aain repeated his lon-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call and the
uplifted whip meant that he saw a sittin hare.)

"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilain carelessly. "Yes, we must
ride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seein in Erza
and "Uncle's" red Ruay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of
pittin aainst his own borzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka at
once!" he thouht as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilain toward the hare.

"A full-rown one?" asked Ilain as he approached the whip who had
sihted the hare--and not without aitation he looked round and whistled
to Erza.

"And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressin "Uncle."

The latter was ridin with a sullen expression on his face.

"How can I join in? Why, you've iven a villae for each of your
borzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yours
aainst one another, you two, and I'll look on!"

"Ruay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Ruayushka!" he added, involuntarily by
this diminutive expressin his affection and the hopes he placed on this
red borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the aitation the two elderly men and
her brother were tryin to conceal, and was herself excited by it.

The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holdin up his whip and the
entlefolk rode up to him at a footpace; the hounds that were far off on
the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not the
entlefolk, also moved away. All were movin slowly and sedately.

"How is it pointin?" asked Nicholas, ridin a hundred paces toward the
whip who had sihted the hare.

But before the whip could reply, the hare, scentin the frost comin
next mornin, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rushed
downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois that
were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt,
who had been movin slowly, shouted, "Stop!" callin in the hounds,
while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" alloped across the field
settin the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilain, Nicholas, Natasha,
and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they went, seein only the
borzois and the hare and fearin only to lose siht even for an instant
of the chase. The hare they had started was a stron and swift one. When
he jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listenin to
the shoutin and tramplin that resounded from all sides at once. He
took a dozen bounds, not very quickly, lettin the borzois ain on him,
and, finally havin chosen his direction and realized his daner, laid
back his ears and rushed off headlon. He had been lyin in the stubble,
but in front of him was the autumn sowin where the round was soft. The
two borzois of the huntsman who had sihted him, havin been the
nearest, were the first to see and pursue him, but they had not one far
before Ilain's red-spotted Erza passed them, ot within a lenth, flew
at the hare with terrible swiftness aimin at his scut, and, thinkin
she had seized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his back
and bounded off yet more swiftly. From behind Erza rushed the broad-
haunched, black-spotted Milka and bean rapidly ainin on the hare.

"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as if Milka
would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flew
past. The hare had squatted. Aain the beautiful Erza reached him, but
when close to the hare's scut paused as if measurin the distance, so as
not to make a mistake this time but seize his hind le.

"Erza, darlin!" Ilain wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erza did not
hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have seized her
prey, the hare moved and darted alon the balk between the winter rye
and the stubble. Aain Erza and Milka were abreast, runnin like a pair
of carriae horses, and bean to overtake the hare, but it was easier
for the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so
quickly.

"Ruay, Ruayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then,
and "Uncle's" red borzoi, strainin and curvin its back, cauht up with
the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them reardless of the
terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off the balk
onto the ryefield, aain put on speed still more viciously, sinkin to
his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, muddyin
his back, he rolled over with the hare. A rin of borzois surrounded
him. A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dos. Only
the delihted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shakin the hare
for the blood to drip off, and anxiously lancin round with restless
eyes while his arms and les twitched. He spoke without himself knowin
whom to or what about. "That's it, come on! That's a do!... There, it
has beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble
borzois. That's it, come on!" said he, pantin and lookin wrathfully
around as if he were abusin someone, as if they were all his enemies
and had insulted him, and only now had he at last succeeded in
justifyin himself. "There are your thousand-ruble ones.... That's it,
come on!..."

"Ruay, here's a pad for you!" he said, throwin down the hare's muddy
pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!"

"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"
said Nicholas, also not listenin to anyone and reardless of whether he
were heard or not.

"But what is there in runnin across it like that?" said Ilain's room.

"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any monrel could take it,"
Ilain was sayin at the same time, breathless from his allop and his
excitement. At the same moment Natasha, without drawin breath, screamed
joyously, ecstatically, and so piercinly that it set everyone's ear
tinlin. By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by all
talkin at once, and it was so strane that she must herself have been
ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at it
at any other time. "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it neatly
and smartly across his horse's back as if by that esture he meant to
rebuke everybody, and, with an air of not wishin to speak to anyone,
mounted his bay and rode off. The others all followed, dispirited and
shamefaced, and only much later were they able to reain their former
affectation of indifference. For a lon time they continued to look at
red Ruay who, his arched back spattered with mud and clankin the rin
of his leash, walked alon just behind "Uncle's" horse with the serene
air of a conqueror.

"Well, I am like any other do as lon as it's not a question of
coursin. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seemed to
Nicholas to be sayin.

When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and bean talkin to him,
he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle" deined to
speak to him.




CHAPTER VII

Toward evenin Ilain took leave of Nicholas, who found that they were
so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the huntin party
should spend the niht in his little villae of Mikhaylovna.

"And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,
come on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could rest,
and the little countess could be driven home in a trap."

"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for a
trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.

Some five male domestic serfs, bi and little, rushed out to the front
porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and youn, as
well as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at
the hunters who were arrivin. The presence of Natasha--a woman, a lady,
and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a deree
that many of them came up to her, stared her in the face, and unabashed
by her presence made remarks about her as thouh she were some prodiy
on show and not a human bein able to hear or understand what was said
about her.

"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirt
danles.... See, she's ot a little huntin horn!"

"oodness racious! See her knife?..."

"Isn't she a Tartar!"

"How is it you didn't o head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,
addressin Natasha directly.

"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which stood
in the midst of an overrown arden and, after a lance at his
retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should take
themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made to
receive the uests and the visitors.

The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse and takin
her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The house,
with its bare, unplastered lo walls, was not overclean--it did not seem
that those livin in it aimed at keepin it spotless--but neither was it
noticeably nelected. In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples,
and wolf and fox skins hun about.

"Uncle" led the visitors throuh the anteroom into a small hall with a
foldin table and red chairs, then into the drawin room with a round
birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room where
there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvorov, of
the host's father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The
study smelt stronly of tobacco and dos. "Uncle" asked his visitors to
sit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.
Ruay, his back still muddy, came into the room and lay down on the
sofa, cleanin himself with his tonue and teeth. Leadin from the study
was a passae in which a partition with raed curtains could be seen.
From behind this came women's lauhter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas,
and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leanin
on his elbow, fell asleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent.
Their faces lowed, they were hunry and very cheerful. They looked at
one another (now that the hunt was over and they were in the house,
Nicholas no loner considered it necessary to show his manly superiority
over his sister), Natasha ave him a wink, and neither refrained lon
from burstin into a peal of rinin lauhter even before they had a
pretext ready to account for it.

After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, and
small top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the very one she
had rearded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the riht
thin and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat. "Uncle"
too was in hih spirits and far from bein offended by the brother's and
sister's lauhter (it could never enter his head that they miht be
lauhin at his way of life) he himself joined in the merriment.

"That's riht, youn countess, that's it, come on! I never saw anyone
like her!" said he, offerin Nicholas a pipe with a lon stem and, with
a practiced motion of three finers, takin down another that had been
cut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as ever!"

Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently from
the sound by a barefooted irl, and a stout, rosy, ood-lookin woman of
about forty, with a double chin and full red lips, entered carryin a
lare loaded tray. With hospitable dinity and cordiality in her lance
and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with a pleasant
smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional stoutness, which
caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head,
this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod very lihtly. She went
to the table, set down the tray, and with her plump white hands deftly
took from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and
arraned them on the table. When she had finished, she stepped aside and
stopped at the door with a smile on her face. "Here I am. I am she! Now
do you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to Rostov. How could one
help understandin? Not only Nicholas, but even Natasha understood the
meanin of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that
slihtly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the tray
was a bottle of herb wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms,
rye cakes made with buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and
sparklin mead, apples, nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honey
sweets. Afterwards she brouht a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves
made with honey, and preserves made with suar.

All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeepin, athered and
prepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya
Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness, cleanliness, whiteness, and
pleasant smiles.

"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept sayin, as she offered
Natasha first one thin and then another.

Natasha ate of everythin and thouht she had never seen or eaten such
buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or such
a chicken anywhere. Anisya Fedorovna left the room.

After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked of
past and future hunts, of Ruay and Ilain's dos, while Natasha sat
upriht on the sofa and listened with sparklin eyes. She tried several
times to wake Petya that he miht eat somethin, but he only muttered
incoherent words without wakin up. Natasha felt so lihthearted and
happy in these novel surroundins that she only feared the trap would
come for her too soon. After a casual pause, such as often occurs when
receivin friends for the first time in one's own house, "Uncle,"
answerin a thouht that was in his visitors' minds, said:

"This, you see, is how I am finishin my days... Death will come. That's
it, come on! Nothin will remain. Then why harm anyone?"

"Uncle's" face was very sinificant and even handsome as he said this.
Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the ood he had heard about him from
his father and the neihbors. Throuhout the whole province "Uncle" had
the reputation of bein the most honorable and disinterested of cranks.
They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor,
confided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts;
but he always persistently refused public appointments, passin the
autumn and sprin in the fields on his bay eldin, sittin at home in
winter, and lyin in his overrown arden in summer.

"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"

"I did once, but ave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come on! I
can't make head or tail of it. That's for you--I haven't brains enouh.
Now, huntin is another matter--that's it, come on! Open the door,
there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"

The door at the end of the passae led to the huntsmen's room, as they
called the room for the hunt servants.

There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened the
door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a
balalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was
playin. Natasha had been listenin to those strains for some time and
now went out into the passae to hear better.

"That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have ot him a ood balalayka. I'm fond
of it," said "Uncle."

It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen's room
when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond of such music.

"How ood! Really very ood!" said Nicholas with some unintentional
superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him
very much.

"Very ood?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticin her brother's tone.
"Not 'very ood' it's simply delicious!"

Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had seemed
to her the best in the world, so also that son, at that moment, seemed
to her the acme of musical deliht.

"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka
ceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrummin the balalayka
to the air of My Lady, with trills and variations. "Uncle" sat
listenin, slihtly smilin, with his head on one side. The air was
repeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned several times and
the same notes were thrummed aain, but the listeners did not row weary
of it and wished to hear it aain and aain. Anisya Fedorovna came in
and leaned her portly person aainst the doorpost.

"You like listenin?" she said to Natasha, with a smile extremely like
"Uncle's." "That's a ood player of ours," she added.

"He doesn't play that part riht!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an
eneretic esture. "Here he ouht to burst out--that's it, come on!--
ouht to burst out."

"Do you play then?" asked Natasha.

"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.

"Anisya, o and see if the strins of my uitar are all riht. I haven't
touched it for a lon time. That's it--come on! I've iven it up."

Anisya Fedorovna, with her liht step, willinly went to fulfill her
errand and brouht back the uitar.

Without lookin at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tappin the
case with his bony finers, tuned the uitar and settled himself in his
armchair. He took the uitar a little above the finerboard, archin his
left elbow with a somewhat theatrical esture, and, with a wink at
Anisya Fedorovna, struck a sinle chord, pure and sonorous, and then
quietly, smoothly, and confidently bean playin in very slow time, not
My Lady, but the well-known son: Came a maiden down the street. The
tune, played with precision and in exact time, bean to thrill in the
hearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousin in them the same kind of sober
mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole bein. Anisya Fedorovna
flushed, and drawin her kerchief over her face went lauhin out of the
room. "Uncle" continued to play correctly, carefully, with eneretic
firmness, lookin with a chaned and inspired expression at the spot
where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood. Somethin seemed to be lauhin a
little on one side of his face under his ray mustaches, especially as
the son rew brisker and the time quicker and when, here and there, as
he ran his finers over the strins, somethin seemed to snap.

"Lovely, lovely! o on, Uncle, o on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he had
finished. She jumped up and hued and kissed him. "Nicholas, Nicholas!"
she said, turnin to her brother, as if askin him: "What is it moves me
so?"

Nicholas too was reatly pleased by "Uncle's" playin, and "Uncle"
played the piece over aain. Anisya Fedorovna's smilin face reappeared
in the doorway and behind hers other faces...


Fetchin water clear and sweet, Stop, dear maiden, I entreat--

played "Uncle" once more, runnin his finers skillfully over the
strins, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.

"o on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an implorin tone as if her life
depended on it.

"Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him: one of them
smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck a
naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.

"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, wavin to Natasha the hand that had
just struck a chord.

Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face
"Uncle," and settin her arms akimbo also made a motion with her
shoulders and struck an attitude.

Where, how, and when had this youn countess, educated by an emiree
French overness, imbibed from the Russian air she breathed that spirit
and obtained that manner which the pas de chale * would, one would have
supposed, lon ao have effaced? But the spirit and the movements were
those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that "Uncle" had expected
of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphantly,
proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seized
Nicholas and the others that she miht not do the riht thin was at an
end, and they were already admirin her.


* The French shawl dance.

She did the riht thin with such precision, such complete precision,
that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her the handkerchief she
needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, thouh she lauhed as she
watched this slim, raceful countess, reared in silks and velvets and so
different from herself, who yet was able to understand all that was in
Anisya and in Anisya's father and mother and aunt, and in every Russian
man and woman.

"Well, little countess; that's it--come on!" cried "Uncle," with a
joyous lauh, havin finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fine
youn fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it--come on!"

"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smilin.

"Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, lookin inquirinly at Natasha, who
nodded her head with a happy smile.

"And such a one!" she said. But as soon as she had said it a new train
of thouhts and feelins arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile mean
when he said 'chosen already'? Is he lad of it or not? It is as if he
thouht my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our aiety. But
he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thouht, and her face
suddenly became serious. But this lasted only a second. "Don't dare to
think about it," she said to herself, and sat down aain smilinly
beside "Uncle," bein him to play somethin more.

"Uncle" played another son and a valse; then after a pause he cleared
his throat and san his favorite huntin son:


As 'twas rowin dark last niht Fell the snow so soft and liht...

"Uncle" san as peasants sin, with full and naive conviction that the
whole meanin of a son lies in the words and that the tune comes of
itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which exists
only to ive measure to the words. As a result of this the unconsidered
tune, like the son of a bird, was extraordinarily ood. Natasha was in
ecstasies over "Uncle's" sinin. She resolved to ive up learnin the
harp and to play only the uitar. She asked "Uncle" for his uitar and
at once found the chords of the son.

After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been sent to
look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The count and
countess did not know where they were and were very anxious, said one of
the men.

Petya was carried out like a lo and laid in the larer of the two
traps. Natasha and Nicholas ot into the other. "Uncle" wrapped Natasha
up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. He
accompanied them on foot as far as the bride that could not be crossed,
so that they had to o round by the ford, and he sent huntsmen to ride
in front with lanterns.

"ood-bye, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness--not the
voice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sun As 'twas
rowin dark last niht.

In the villae throuh which they passed there were red lihts and a
cheerful smell of smoke.

"What a darlin Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto the
hihroad.

"Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?"

"No. I'm quite, quite all riht. I feel so comfortable!" answered
Natasha, almost perplexed by her feelins. They remained silent a lon
while. The niht was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, but
only heard them splashin throuh the unseen mud.

What was passin in that receptive childlike soul that so eaerly cauht
and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did they all
find place in her? But she was very happy. As they were nearin home she
suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas rowin dark last niht--the tune
of which she had all the way been tryin to et and had at last cauht.

"ot it?" said Nicholas.

"What were you thinkin about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.

They were fond of askin one another that question.

"I?" said Nicholas, tryin to remember. "Well, you see, first I thouht
that Ruay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were a man he
would always keep Uncle near him, if not for his ridin, then for his
manner. What a ood fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?... Well, and
you?"

"I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thouht that we are drivin alon
and imainin that we are oin home, but that heaven knows where we are
really oin in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and suddenly find
that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I thouht... No,
nothin else."

"I know, I expect you thouht of him," said Nicholas, smilin as Natasha
knew by the sound of his voice.

"No," said Natasha, thouh she had in reality been thinkin about Prince
Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would have liked
"Uncle." "And then I was sayin to myself all the way, 'How well Anisya
carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her spontaneous, happy,
rinin lauhter. "And do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that I
shall never aain be as happy and tranquil as I am now."

"Rubbish, nonsense, humbu!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thouht: "How
charmin this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her and
never shall have. Why should she marry? We miht always drive about
toether!"

"What a darlin this Nicholas of mine is!" thouht Natasha.

"Ah, there are still lihts in the drawin-room!" she said, pointin to
the windows of the house that leamed invitinly in the moist velvety
darkness of the niht.




CHAPTER VIII

Count Ilya Rostov had resined the position of Marshal of the Nobility
because it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs did
not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferrin
toether anxiously and privately and heard suestions of sellin the
fine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow. It was not necessary
to entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life at
Otradnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the enormous house
and its lodes were full of people and more than twenty sat down to
table every day. These were all their own people who had settled down in
the house almost as members of the family, or persons who were, it
seemed, oblied to live in the count's house. Such were Dimmler the
musician and his wife, Voel the dancin master and his family, Belova,
an old maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many others such as
Petya's tutors, the irls' former overness, and other people who simply
found it preferable and more advantaeous to live in the count's house
than at home. They had not as many visitors as before, but the old
habits of life without which the count and countess could not conceive
of existence remained unchaned. There was still the huntin
establishment which Nicholas had even enlared, the same fifty horses
and fifteen rooms in the stables, the same expensive presents and
dinner parties to the whole district on name days; there were still the
count's ames of whist and boston, at which--spreadin out his cards so
that everybody could see them--he let himself be plundered of hundreds
of rubles every day by his neihbors, who looked upon an opportunity to
play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income.

The count moved in his affairs as in a hue net, tryin not to believe
that he was entanled but becomin more and more so at every step, and
feelin too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and
patiently to disentanle them. The countess, with her lovin heart, felt
that her children were bein ruined, that it was not the count's fault
for he could not help bein what he was--that (thouh he tried to hide
it) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and his
children's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedyin the position.
From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely,
for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to be their last
hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him, she
would have to abandon the hope of ever ettin matters riht. This match
was with Julie Karaina, the dauhter of excellent and virtuous parents,
a irl the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a
wealthy heiress throuh the death of the last of her brothers.

The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suestin a
marriae between their children and had received a favorable answer from
her. Karaina had replied that for her part she was areeable, and
everythin depend on her dauhter's inclination. She invited Nicholas to
come to Moscow.

Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son that
now both her dauhters were settled, her only wish was to see him
married. She said she could lie down in her rave peacefully if that
were accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendid irl
and tried to discover what he thouht about marriae.

At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to o to Moscow
durin the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas uessed what his mother's
remarks were leadin to and durin one of these conversations induced
her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope of ettin
their affairs disentanled now lay in his marryin Julie Karaina.

"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a irl who has no fortune, would you expect
me to sacrifice my feelins and my honor for the sake of money?" he
asked his mother, not realizin the cruelty of his question and only
wishin to show his noble-mindedness.

"No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowin how to
justify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is your
happiness I wish for," she added, feelin that she was tellin an
untruth and was becomin entanled. She bean to cry.

"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I will
ive my life, anythin, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "I would
sacrifice anythin for you--even my feelins."

But the countess did not want the question put like that: she did not
want a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make a sacrifice
for him.

"No, you have not understood me, don't let us talk about it," she
replied, wipin away her tears.

"Maybe I do love a poor irl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I to
sacrifice my feelins and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could
speak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he thouht,
"must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should certainly
be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can always
sacrifice my feelins for my family's welfare," he said to himself, "but
I can't coerce my feelins. If I love Sonya, that feelin is for me
stroner and hiher than all else."

Nicholas did not o to Moscow, and the countess did not renew the
conversation with him about marriae. She saw with sorrow, and sometimes
with exasperation, symptoms of a rowin attachment between her son and
the portionless Sonya. Thouh she blamed herself for it, she could not
refrain from rumblin at and worryin Sonya, often pullin her up
without reason, addressin her stiffly as "my dear," and usin the
formal "you" instead of the intimate "thou" in speakin to her. The
kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya because that poor,
dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly rateful to
her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchaninly, and unselfishly in
love with Nicholas, that there were no rounds for findin fault with
her.

Nicholas was spendin the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter had
come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have
been on his way back to Russia lon ao had not his wound unexpectedly
reopened in the warm climate, which oblied him to defer his return till
the beinnin of the new year. Natasha was still as much in love with
her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still as
ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but at
the end of the fourth month of their separation she bean to have fits
of depression which she could not master. She felt sorry for herself:
sorry that she was bein wasted all this time and of no use to anyone--
while she felt herself so capable of lovin and bein loved.

Thins were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.




CHAPTER IX

Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and
wearisome Christmas conratulations from neihbors and servants, and the
new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities, thouh
the calm frost of twenty derees Reaumur, the dazzlin sunshine by day,
and the starliht of the winter nihts seemed to call for some special
celebration of the season.

On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the
inmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest time
of the day. Nicholas, who had been visitin some neihbors that mornin,
was asleep on the sittin-room sofa. The old count was restin in his
study. Sonya sat in the drawin room at the round table, copyin a
desin for embroidery. The countess was playin patience. Nastasya
Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old
ladies. Natasha came into the room, went up to Sonya, lanced at what
she was doin, and then went up to her mother and stood without
speakin.

"Why are you wanderin about like an outcast?" asked her mother. "What
do you want?"

"Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, with
litterin eyes and no sin of a smile.

The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her dauhter.

"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly."

"Sit down with me a little," said the countess.

"Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"

Her voice broke, tears ushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to
hide them and left the room.

She passed into the sittin room, stood there thinkin awhile, and then
went into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was rumblin at a
youn irl who stood pantin, havin just run in throuh the cold from
the serfs' quarters.

"Stop playin--there's a time for everythin," said the old woman.

"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "o, Mavrushka, o."

Havin released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancin hall and went to
the vestibule. There an old footman and two youn ones were playin
cards. They broke off and rose as she entered.

"What can I do with them?" thouht Natasha.

"Oh, Nikita, please o... where can I send him?... Yes, o to the yard
and fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, brin me some oats."

"Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily.

"o, o quickly," the old man ured him.

"And you, Theodore, et me a piece of chalk."

On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set a samovar,
thouh it was not at all the time for tea.

Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house. Natasha
liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order and asked
whether the samovar was really wanted.

"Oh dear, what a youn lady!" said Foka, pretendin to frown at Natasha.

No one in the house sent people about or ave them as much trouble as
Natasha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to send
them on some errand. She seemed to be tryin whether any of them would
et anry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no one's orders so
readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can I o?" thouht she,
as she went slowly alon the passae.

"Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she asked the
buffoon, who was comin toward her in a woman's jacket.

"Why, fleas, crickets, rasshoppers," answered the buffoon.

"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to o? What am I
to do with myself?" And tappin with her heels, she ran quickly upstairs
to see Voel and his wife who lived on the upper story.

Two overnesses were sittin with the Voels at a table, on which were
plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The overnesses were discussin
whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natasha sat down,
listened to their talk with a serious and thouhtful air, and then ot
up aain.

"The island of Madaascar," she said, "Ma-da-as-car," she repeated,
articulatin each syllable distinctly, and, not replyin to Madame
Schoss who asked her what she was sayin, she went out of the room.

Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him he
was preparin fireworks to let off that niht.

"Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."

Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, puttin her
arms round his neck, and he pranced alon with her.

"No, don't... the island of Madaascar!" she said, and jumpin off his
back she went downstairs.

Havin as it were reviewed her kindom, tested her power, and made sure
that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull, Natasha
betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her uitar, sat down in a dark
corner behind a bookcase, and bean to run her finers over the strins
in the bass, pickin out a passae she recalled from an opera she had
heard in Petersbur with Prince Andrew. What she drew from the uitar
would have had no meanin for other listeners, but in her imaination a
whole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds. She sat behind
the bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of liht escapin from the
pantry door and listened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood for
broodin on the past.

Sonya passed to the pantry with a lass in her hand. Natasha lanced at
her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her that she
remembered the liht fallin throuh that crack once before and Sonya
passin with a lass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly the same," thouht
Natasha.

"Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanin a thick strin.

"Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near and
listened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of bein
wron.

"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smilin
timidly when all this happened before," thouht Natasha, "and in just
the same way I thouht there was somethin lackin in her."

"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha san
the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Where were you
oin?" she asked.

"To chane the water in this lass. I am just finishin the desin."

"You always find somethin to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "And
where's Nicholas?"

"Asleep, I think."

"Sonya, o and wake him," said Natasha. "Tell him I want him to come and
sin."

She sat awhile, wonderin what the meanin of it all havin happened
before could be, and without solvin this problem, or at all rerettin
not havin done so, she aain passed in fancy to the time when she was
with him and he was lookin at her with a lover's eyes.

"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!
And, worst of all, I am rowin old--that's the thin! There won't then
be in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, will come
immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sittin in the drawin room.
Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forotten it." She rose, put down
the uitar, and went to the drawin room.

All the domestic circle, tutors, overnesses, and uests, were already
at the tea table. The servants stood round the table--but Prince Andrew
was not there and life was oin on as before.

"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter. "Well,
sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and lanced round as
if lookin for somethin.

"Mamma!" she muttered, "ive him to me, ive him, Mamma, quickly,
quickly!" and she aain had difficulty in repressin her sobs.

She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between the
elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My od, my od!
The same faces, the same talk, Papa holdin his cup and blowin in the
same way!" thouht Natasha, feelin with horror a sense of repulsion
risin up in her for the whole household, because they were always the
same.

After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sittin room, to
their favorite corner where their most intimate talks always bean.




CHAPTER X

"Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when they
settled down in the sittin room, "does it ever happen to you to feel as
if there were nothin more to come--nothin; that everythin ood is
past? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?"

"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when everythin
was all riht and everyone was cheerful. The thouht has come into my
mind that I was already tired of it all, and that we must all die. Once
in the reiment I had not one to some merrymakin where there was
music... and suddenly I felt so depressed..."

"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When I was
quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when I was
punished once about some plums? You were all dancin, and I sat sobbin
in the schoolroom? I shall never foret it: I felt sad and sorry for
everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was innocent--that was the
chief thin," said Natasha. "Do you remember?"

"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to you
afterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamed
to. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to ive
it to you. Do you remember?"

"And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once,
lon, lon ao, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into the
study--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in and
suddenly there stood..."

"A Nero," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of deliht. "Of course I
remember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Nero, or if
we only dreamed it or were told about him."

"He was ray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked at
us..."

"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.

"Yes, yes, I do remember somethin too," Sonya answered timidly.

"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Nero," said Natasha,
"and they say there was no Nero at all. But you see, you remember!"

"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."

"How strane it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that."

"And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled es in the ballroom, and
suddenly two old women bean spinnin round on the carpet? Was that real
or not? Do you remember what fun it was?"

"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a un in the
porch?"

So they went throuh their memories, smilin with pleasure: not the sad
memories of old ae, but poetic, youthful ones--those impressions of
one's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend--and they
lauhed with quiet enjoyment.

Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, thouh they shared
the same reminiscences.

Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what she
recalled did not arouse the same poetic feelin as they experienced. She
simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.

She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's first arrival. She
told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a corded
jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up with
cords.

"And I remember their tellin me that you had been born under a
cabbae," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not disbelieve it
then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."

While they were talkin a maid thrust her head in at the other door of
the sittin room.

"They have brouht the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.

"It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.

In the middle of their talk in the sittin room, Dimmler came in and
went up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its cloth
coverin, and the harp ave out a jarrin sound.

"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the old
countess' voice from the drawin room.

Dimmler struck a chord and, turnin to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,
remarked: "How quiet you youn people are!"

"Yes, we're philosophizin," said Natasha, lancin round for a moment
and then continuin the conversation. They were now discussin dreams.

Dimmler bean to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,
took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seatin herself quietly
in her former place. It was dark in the room especially where they were
sittin on the sofa, but throuh the bi windows the silvery liht of
the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece but
still sat softly runnin his finers over the strins, evidently
uncertain whether to stop or to play somethin else.

"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, movin closer to Nicholas and
Sonya, "that when one oes on and on recallin memories, one at last
beins to remember what happened before one was in the world..."

"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, and
remembered everythin. "The Eyptians believed that our souls have lived
in animals, and will o back into animals aain."

"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still in a
whisper thouh the music had ceased. "But I am certain that we were
anels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we
remember...."

"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat down
by them.

"If we have been anels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas. "No,
that can't be!"

"Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was before?"
Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal--well then, if I
shall always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity."

"Yes, but it is hard for us to imaine eternity," remarked Dimmler, who
had joined the youn folk with a mildly condescendin smile but now
spoke as quietly and seriously as they.

"Why is it hard to imaine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now today,
and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and the
day before..."

"Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sin me somethin," they heard the
countess say. "Why are you sittin there like conspirators?"

"Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied Natasha, but all the same she
rose.

None of them, not even the middle-aed Dimmler, wanted to break off
their conversation and quit that corner in the sittin room, but Natasha
ot up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standin as usual in the
middle of the hall and choosin the place where the resonance was best,
Natasha bean to sin her mother's favorite son.

She had said she did not want to sin, but it was lon since she had
sun, and lon before she aain san, as she did that evenin. The
count, from his study where he was talkin to Mitenka, heard her and,
like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talk
while ivin orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenka
stood in front of him also listenin and smilin. Nicholas did not take
his eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sonya, as she
listened, thouht of the immense difference there was between herself
and her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anythin like as
bewitchin as her cousin. The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad
smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shakin her head. She
thouht of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there was somethin
unnatural and dreadful in this impendin marriae of Natasha and Prince
Andrew.

Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with
closed eyes.

"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she has
nothin to learn--what softness, tenderness, and strenth...."

"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess, not
realizin to whom she was speakin. Her maternal instinct told her that
Natasha had too much of somethin, and that because of this she would
not be happy. Before Natasha had finished sinin, fourteen-year-old
Petya rushed in delihtedly, to say that some mummers had arrived.

Natasha stopped abruptly.

"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, runnin to a chair, threw
herself on it, sobbin so violently that she could not stop for a lon
time.

"It's nothin, Mamma, really it's nothin; only Petya startled me," she
said, tryin to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked
her.

The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,
innkeepers, and ladies--frihtenin and funny--brinin in with them the
cold from outside and a feelin of aiety, crowded, at first timidly,
into the anteroom, then hidin behind one another they pushed into the
ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily and
heartily, they started sinin, dancin, and playin Christmas ames.
The countess, when she had identified them and lauhed at their
costumes, went into the drawin room. The count sat in the ballroom,
smilin radiantly and applaudin the players. The youn people had
disappeared.

Half an hour later there appeared amon the other mummers in the
ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt--this was Nicholas. A Turkish
irl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natasha, and a
Circassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.

After the condescendin surprise, nonreconition, and praise, from those
who were not themselves dressed up, the youn people decided that their
costumes were so ood that they ouht to be shown elsewhere.

Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted to take
them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about a
dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."

"No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, you
wouldn't have room to turn round there. If you must o, o to the
Melyukovs'."

Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors and
overnesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.

"That's riht, my dear," chimed in the old count, thorouhly aroused.
"I'll dress up at once and o with them. I'll make Pashette open her
eyes."

But the countess would not aree to his oin; he had had a bad le all
these last days. It was decided that the count must not o, but that if
Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would o with them, the youn ladies
miht o to the Melyukovs', Sonya, enerally so timid and shy, more
urently than anyone bein Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.

Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows were
extraordinarily becomin. Everyone told her she looked very handsome,
and she was in a spirited and eneretic mood unusual with her. Some
inner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and in
her male attire she seemed quite a different person. Louisa Ivanovna
consented to o, and in half an hour four troyka sleihs with lare and
small bells, their runners squeakin and whistlin over the frozen snow,
drove up to the porch.

Natasha was foremost in settin a merry holiday tone, which, passin
from one to another, rew stroner and reached its climax when they all
came out into the frost and ot into the sleihs, talkin, callin to
one another, lauhin, and shoutin.

Two of the troykas were the usual household sleihs, the third was the
old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse, the
fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shay black shaft horse.
Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussar
overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleih, reins in hand.

It was so liht that he could see the moonliht reflected from the metal
harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked round in alarm
at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.

Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids ot into Nicholas' sleih;
Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of the
mummers seated themselves in the other two sleihs.

"You o ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,
wishin for a chance to race past him.

The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,
squeakin on its runners as thouh freezin to the snow, its deep-toned
bell clanin. The side horses, pressin aainst the shafts of the
middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and littered like suar,
and threw it up.

Nicholas set off, followin the first sleih; behind him the others
moved noisily, their runners squeakin. At first they drove at a steady
trot alon the narrow road. While they drove past the arden the shadows
of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant
moonliht, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain
bathed in moonliht and motionless spread out before them litterin
like diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Ban, ban! went the
first sleih over a cradle hole in the snow of the road, and each of the
other sleihs jolted in the same way, and rudely breakin the frost-
bound stillness, the troykas bean to speed alon the road, one after
the other.

"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" ran out Natasha's voice throuh the
frost-bound air.

"How liht it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.

Nicholas lanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her face closer.
Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at
him from her sable furs--so close and yet so distant--in the moonliht.

"That used to be Sonya," thouht he, and looked at her closer and
smiled.

"What is it, Nicholas?"

"Nothin," said he and turned aain to the horses.

When they came out onto the beaten hihroad--polished by sleih runners
and cut up by rouh-shod hoofs, the marks of which were visible in the
moonliht--the horses bean to tu at the reins of their own accord and
increased their pace. The near side horse, archin his head and breakin
into a short canter, tued at his traces. The shaft horse swayed from
side to side, movin his ears as if askin: "Isn't it time to bein
now?" In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleih rinin
farther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhar could be
clearly seen aainst the white snow. From that sleih one could hear the
shouts, lauhter, and voices of the mummers.

"ee up, my darlins!" shouted Nicholas, pullin the reins to one side
and flourishin the whip.

It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks iven by the
side horses who pulled harder--ever increasin their allop--that one
noticed how fast the troyka was flyin. Nicholas looked back. With
screams squeals, and wavin of whips that caused even the shaft horses
to allop--the other sleihs followed. The shaft horse swun steadily
beneath the bow over its head, with no thouht of slackenin pace and
ready to put on speed when required.

Nicholas overtook the first sleih. They were drivin downhill and
comin out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.

"Where are we?" thouht he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose. But no--
this is somethin new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoy
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is
somethin new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shoutin
to his horses, he bean to pass the first sleih.

Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, which was already
covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.

Nicholas ave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretchin out his arms,
clucked his tonue and let his horses o.

"Now, look out, master!" he cried.

Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved the
feet of the allopin side horses. Nicholas bean to draw ahead. Zakhar,
while still keepin his arms extended, raised one hand with the reins.

"No you won't, master!" he shouted.

Nicholas put all his horses to a allop and passed Zakhar. The horses
showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleih--beside
them sounded quick rinin bells and they cauht confused limpses of
swiftly movin les and the shadows of the troyka they were passin. The
whistlin sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of irls
shriekin were heard from different sides.

Aain checkin his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They were still
surrounded by the maic plain bathed in moonliht and spanled with
stars.

"Zakhar is shoutin that I should turn to the left, but why to the
left?" thouht Nicholas. "Are we ettin to the Melyukovs'? Is this
Melyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are oin, and heaven knows what
is happenin to us--but it is very strane and pleasant whatever it is."
And he looked round in the sleih.

"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of the
strane, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows and
mustache.

"I think this used to be Natasha," thouht Nicholas, "and that was
Madame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the
mustache I don't know, but I love her."

"Aren't you cold?" he asked.

They did not answer but bean to lauh. Dimmler from the sleih behind
shouted somethin--probably somethin funny--but they could not make out
what he said.

"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, lauhin.

"But here was a fairy forest with black movin shadows, and a litter of
diamonds and a fliht of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy
buildins and the shrill yells of some animals. And if this is really
Melyukovka, it is still straner that we drove heaven knows where and
have come to Melyukovka," thouht Nicholas.

It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came
runnin, out to the porch carryin candles.

"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.

"The mummers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied some
voices.




CHAPTER XI

Pelaeya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, eneretic woman wearin
spectacles, sat in the drawin room in a loose dress, surrounded by her
dauhters whom she was tryin to keep from feelin dull. They were
quietly droppin melted wax into snow and lookin at the shadows the wax
fiures would throw on the wall, when they heard the steps and voices of
new arrivals in the vestibule.

Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearin their
throats and wipin the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule, came
into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lihted. The clown--
Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance. Surrounded by the
screamin children the mummers, coverin their faces and disuisin
their voices, bowed to their hostess and arraned themselves about the
room.

"Dear me! there's no reconizin them! And Natasha! See whom she looks
like! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler--isn't he
ood! I didn't know him! And how he dances. Dear me, there's a
Circassian. Really, how becomin it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?
Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!
And we were sittin so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!
Just like a boy! And the les!... I can't look at him..." different
voices were sayin.

Natasha, the youn Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them into the
back rooms where a cork and various dressin owns and male arments
were called for and received from the footman by bare irlish arms from
behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the youn Melyukovs joined the
mummers.

Pelaeya Danilovna, havin iven orders to clear the rooms for the
visitors and arraned about refreshments for the entry and the serfs,
went about amon the mummers without removin her spectacles, peerin
into their faces with a suppressed smile and failin to reconize any of
them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to reconize,
she did not even reconize her own dauhters, or her late husband's,
dressin owns and uniforms, which they had put on.

"And who is this?" she asked her overness, peerin into the face of her
own dauhter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is one of the
Rostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what reiment do you serve in?" she asked
Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she ordered the
butler who was handin thins round. "That's not forbidden by his law."

Sometimes, as she looked at the strane but amusin capers cut by the
dancers, who--havin decided once for all that bein disuised, no one
would reconize them--were not at all shy, Pelaeya Danilovna hid her
face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook with
irrepressible, kindly, elderly lauhter.

"My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.

After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelaeya Danilovna made
the serfs and entry join in one lare circle: a rin, a strin, and a
silver ruble were fetched and they all played ames toether.

In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked
eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspirin, flushed, and
merry faces. Pelaeya Danilovna bean to reconize the mummers, admired
their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly how they suited the
youn ladies, and she thanked them all for havin entertained her so
well. The visitors were invited to supper in the drawin room, and the
serfs had somethin served to them in the ballroom.

"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frihtenin!" said
an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, durin supper.

"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov irl.

"You wouldn't o, it takes courae..."

"I'll o," said Sonya.

"Tell what happened to the youn lady!" said the second Melyukov irl.

"Well," bean the old maid, "a youn lady once went out, took a cock,
laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. After sittin a
while, she suddenly hears someone comin... a sleih drives up with
harness bells; she hears him comin! He comes in, just in the shape of a
man, like an officer--comes in and sits down to table with her."

"Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rollin her eyes with horror.

"Yes? And how... did he speak?"

"Yes, like a man. Everythin quite all riht, and he bean persuadin
her; and she should have kept him talkin till cockcrow, but she ot
frihtened, just ot frihtened and hid her face in her hands. Then he
cauht her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then..."

"Now, why frihten them?" said Pelaeya Danilovna.

"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her dauhter.

"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.

"Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on what
you hear; hammerin and knockin--that's bad; but a sound of shiftin
rain is ood and one sometimes hears that, too."

"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."

Pelaeya Danilovna smiled.

"Oh, I've forotten..." she replied. "But none of you would o?"

"Yes, I will; Pelaeya Danilovna, let me! I'll o," said Sonya.

"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"

"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.

Whether they were playin the rin and strin ame or the ruble ame or
talkin as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and azed at her
with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks to
that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. And
really, that evenin, Sonya was brihter, more animated, and prettier
than Nicholas had ever seen her before.

"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thouht azin
at her sparklin eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile
dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.

"I'm not afraid of anythin," said Sonya. "May I o at once?" She ot
up.

They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,
and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head and
shoulders and lanced at Nicholas.

"What a darlin that irl is!" thouht he. "And what have I been
thinkin of till now?"

Sonya went out into the passae to o to the barn. Nicholas went hastily
to the front porch, sayin he felt too hot. The crowd of people really
had made the house stuffy.

Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but even
brihter than before. The liht was so stron and the snow sparkled with
so many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the real
stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary, while the earth was
ay.

"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waitin for?" thouht Nicholas,
and runnin out from the porch he went round the corner of the house and
alon the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonya would pass that
way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across and
alon them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the
snow and on the path. This path led to the barn. The lo walls of the
barn and its snow-covered roof, that looked as if hewn out of some
precious stone, sparkled in the moonliht. A tree in the arden snapped
with the frost, and then all was aain perfectly silent. His bosom
seemed to inhale not air but the strenth of eternal youth and ladness.

From the back porch came the sound of feet descendin the steps, the
bottom step upon which snow had fallen ave a rinin creak and he heard
the voice of an old maidservant sayin, "Straiht, straiht, alon the
path, Miss. Only, don't look back."

"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and alon the path toward
Nicholas came the crunchin, whistlin sound of Sonya's feet in her thin
shoes.

Sonya came alon, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of paces
away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had
known and always slihtly feared. He was in a woman's dress, with
tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya. She ran rapidly toward him.

"Quite different and yet the same," thouht Nicholas, lookin at her
face all lit up by the moonliht. He slipped his arms under the cloak
that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her
on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sonya
kissed him full on the lips, and disenain her little hands pressed
them to his cheeks.

"Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn and
then back aain, re-enterin, he by the front and she by the back porch.




CHAPTER XII

When they all drove back from Pelaeya Danilovna's, Natasha, who always
saw and noticed everythin, arraned that she and Madame Schoss should
o back in the sleih with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and the
maids.

On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racin and
kept peerin by that fantastic all-transformin liht into Sonya's face
and searchin beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and his
present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted aain. He
looked and reconizin in her both the old and the new Sonya, and bein
reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss,
inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, lookin at the round
flyin beneath him and at the sparklin sky, felt himself aain in
fairyland.

"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.

"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"

When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for
a moment to Natasha's sleih and stood on its win.

"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up my mind
about Sonya?"

"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beamin all over with joy.

"Oh, how strane you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...
Natasha--are you lad?"

"I am so lad, so lad! I was beinnin to be vexed with you. I did not
tell you, but you have been treatin her badly. What a heart she has,
Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be happy while
Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so lad! Well, run back to
her."

"No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peerin
into her face and findin in his sister too somethin new, unusual, and
bewitchinly tender that he had not seen in her before. "Natasha, it's
maical, isn't it?"

"Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."

"Had I seen her before as she is now," thouht Nicholas, "I should lon
ao have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me, and
all would have been well."

"So you are lad and I have done riht?"

"Oh, quite riht! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ao about it.
Mamma said she was anlin for you. How could she say such a thin! I
nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anythin bad of
Sonya, for there is nothin but ood in her."

"Then it's all riht?" said Nicholas, aain scrutinizin the expression
of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Then he jumped down
and, his boots scrunchin the snow, ran back to his sleih. The same
happy, smilin Circassian, with mustache and beamin eyes lookin up
from under a sable hood, was still sittin there, and that Circassian
was Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly his future happy and lovin
wife.

When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent the
evenin at the Melyukovs', the irls went to their bedroom. When they
had undressed, but without washin off the cork mustaches, they sat a
lon time talkin of their happiness. They talked of how they would live
when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how
happy they would be. On Natasha's table stood two lookin lasses which
Dunyasha had prepared beforehand.

"Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be too
ood!" said Natasha, risin and oin to the lookin lasses.

"Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.

Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the lookin lasses,
and sat down.

"I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seein her own face.

"You mustn't lauh, Miss," said Dunyasha.

With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha ot the lass she held into
the riht position opposite the other; her face assumed a serious
expression and she sat silent. She sat a lon time lookin at the
recedin line of candles reflected in the lasses and expectin (from
tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in that
last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she was to take the
smallest speck for the imae of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothin.
She bean blinkin rapidly and moved away from the lookin lasses.

"Why is it others see thins and I don't?" she said. "You sit down now,
Sonya. You absolutely must, toniht! Do it for me.... Today I feel so
frihtened!"

Sonya sat down before the lasses, ot the riht position, and bean
lookin.

"Now, Miss Sonya is sure to see somethin," whispered Dunyasha; "while
you do nothin but lauh."

Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper:

"I know she will. She saw somethin last year."

For about three minutes all were silent.

"Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, but did not finish... suddenly
Sonya pushed away the lass she was holdin and covered her eyes with
her hand.

"Oh, Natasha!" she cried.

"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holdin up the
lookin lass.

Sonya had not seen anythin, she was just wantin to blink and to et up
when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish to
disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still. She
did not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when she
covered her eyes.

"You saw him?" ured Natasha, seizin her hand.

"Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help sayin, not yet
knowin whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.

"But why shouldn't I say I saw somethin? Others do see! Besides who can
tell whether I saw anythin or not?" flashed throuh Sonya's mind.

"Yes, I saw him," she said.

"How? Standin or lyin?"

"No, I saw... At first there was nothin, then I saw him lyin down."

"Andrew lyin? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frihtened eyes fixed on
her friend.

"No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and he
turned to me." And when sayin this she herself fancied she had really
seen what she described.

"Well, and then, Sonya?..."

"After that, I could not make out what there was; somethin blue and
red..."

"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, od, how afraid
I am for him and for myself and about everythin!..." Natasha bean, and
without replyin to Sonya's words of comfort she ot into bed, and lon
after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless, azin at the
moonliht throuh the frosty windowpanes.




CHAPTER XIII

Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love
for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who had
lon noticed what was oin on between them and was expectin this
declaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that he
miht marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his father would
ive their blessin to such a marriae. Nicholas, for the first time,
felt that his mother was displeased with him and that, despite her love
for him, she would not ive way. Coldly, without lookin at her son, she
sent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly to
inform him of the facts, in her son's presence, but unable to restrain
herself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room. The old
count bean irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and be him to abandon his
purpose. Nicholas replied that he could not o back on his word, and his
father, sihin and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and
went in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son, the count
was always conscious of his own uilt toward him for havin wasted the
family fortune, and so he could not be anry with him for refusin to
marry an heiress and choosin the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, he
was only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not
been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have been
wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and his
uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the family
finances.

The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son aain,
but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a cruelty
neither of them expected, reproached her niece for tryin to catch
Nicholas and for inratitude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes
to the countess' cruel words, without understandin what was required of
her. She was ready to sacrifice everythin for her benefactors. Self-
sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could not see
what she ouht to sacrifice, or for whom. She could not help lovin the
countess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could she help lovin
Nicholas and knowin that his happiness depended on that love. She was
silent and sad and did not reply. Nicholas felt the situation to be
intolerable and went to have an explanation with his mother. He first
implored her to forive him and Sonya and consent to their marriae,
then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would at once marry her
secretly.

The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,
replied that he was of ae, that Prince Andrew was marryin without his
father's consent, and he could do the same, but that she would never
receive that intriuer as her dauhter.

Explodin at the word intriuer, Nicholas, raisin his voice, told his
mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell his
feelins, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... But he
had no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his face
caused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps have
forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it,
for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door at
which she had been listenin.

"Nicholas, you are talkin nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, I
tell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.

"Mamma darlin, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darlin," she said
to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of a
rupture azed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy and
excitement of the conflict could not and would not ive way.

"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. o away! Listen, Mamma darlin," said
Natasha.

Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she
was aimin.

The countess, sobbin heavily, hid her face on her dauhter's breast,
while Nicholas rose, clutchin his head, and left the room.

Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should not
be troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anythin
without his parents' knowlede.

Firmly resolved, after puttin his affairs in order in the reiment, to
retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,
sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,
passionately in love, left at the beinnin of January to rejoin his
reiment.

After Nicholas had one thins in the Rostov household were more
depressin than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental aitation.

Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on
account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adoptin toward
her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of his
affairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town house and
estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they had to
o to Moscow. But the countess' health oblied them to delay their
departure from day to day.

Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothed
lihtly and even cheerfully, now rew more aitated and impatient every
day. The thouht that her best days, which she would have employed in
lovin him, were bein vainly wasted, with no advantae to anyone,
tormented her incessantly. His letters for the most part irritated her.
It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thouht of him, he
was livin a real life, seein new places and new people that interested
him. The more interestin his letters were the more vexed she felt. Her
letters to him, far from ivin her any comfort, seemed to her a
wearisome and artificial obliation. She could not write, because she
could not conceive the possibility of expressin sincerely in a letter
even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, and
lance. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which
she attached no importance herself, and in the rouh copies of which the
countess corrected her mistakes in spellin.

There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it was
impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any loner. Natasha's
trousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew
was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spendin the
winter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.

So the countess remained in the country, and the count, takin Sonya and
Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.

BOOK EIHT: 1811 - 12




CHAPTER I

After Prince Andrew's enaement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparent
cause suddenly felt it impossible to o on livin as before. Firmly
convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor, and
happy as he had been in perfectin his inner man, to which he had
devoted himself with such ardor--all the zest of such a life vanished
after the enaement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph
Alexeevich, the news of which reached him almost at the same time. Only
the skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant wife who now
enjoyed the favors of a very important personae, acquaintance with all
Petersbur, and his court service with its dull formalities. And this
life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keepin
a diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, bean oin to the club
aain, drank a reat deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelor
sets, leadin such a life that the Countess Helene thouht it necessary
to speak severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was riht, and
to avoid compromisin her went away to Moscow.

In Moscow as soon as he entered his hue house in which the faded and
fadin princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as,
drivin throuh the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable
tapers burnin before the olden covers of the icons, the Kremlin Square
with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleih drivers and hovels of
the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites who desired nothin, hurried
nowhere, and were endin their days leisurely; when he saw those old
Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the Enlish Club, he felt himself
at home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and
dirty as in an old dressin own.

Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre
like a lon-expected uest whose place was always ready awaitin him.
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual,
merriest, and most mananimous of cranks, a heedless, enial nobleman of
the old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open to
everyone.

Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,
ypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons,
churches, and books--no one and nothin met with a refusal from him, and
had it not been for two friends who had borrowed lare sums from him and
taken him under their protection, he would have iven everythin away.
There was never a dinner or soiree at the club without him. As soon as
he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Maraux he was
surrounded, and talkin, disputin, and jokin bean. When there were
quarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled the
antaonists. The masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was not
there.

When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,
yieldin to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewhere
with them, shouts of deliht and triumph arose amon the youn men. At
balls he danced if a partner was needed. Youn ladies, married and
unmarried, liked him because without makin love to any of them, he was
equally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant; il
n'a pas de sexe," * they said of him.


* "He is charmin; he has no sex."

Pierre was one of those retired entlemen-in-waitin of whom there were
hundreds ood-humoredly endin their days in Moscow.

How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he first
arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him to
seek or plan anythin, that his rut had lon been shaped, eternally
predetermined, and that wrile as he miht, he would be what all in his
position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one time
loned with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia; then
himself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then a
strateist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the
possibility of, and passionately desired, the reeneration of the sinful
human race, and his own proress to the hihest deree of perfection?
Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?

But instead of all that--here he was, the wealthy husband of an
unfaithful wife, a retired entleman-in-waitin, fond of eatin and
drinkin and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusin the overnment
a bit, a member of the Moscow Enlish Club, and a universal favorite in
Moscow society. For a lon time he could not reconcile himself to the
idea that he was one of those same retired Moscow entlemen-in-waitin
he had so despised seven years before.

Sometimes he consoled himself with the thouht that he was only livin
this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thouht of how
many, like himself, had entered that life and that club temporarily,
with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a sinle
tooth or hair remained.

In moments of pride, when he thouht of his position it seemed to him
that he was quite different and distinct from those other retired
entlemen-in-waitin he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,
contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "while I am still
discontented and want to do somethin for mankind. But perhaps all these
comrades of mine struled just like me and souht somethin new, a path
in life of their own, and like me were brouht by force of
circumstances, society, and race--by that elemental force aainst which
man is powerless--to the condition I am in," said he to himself in
moments of humility; and after livin some time in Moscow he no loner
despised, but bean to row fond of, to respect, and to pity his
comrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.

Pierre no loner suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disust
with life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in such
acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment. "What
for? Why? What is oin on in the world?" he would ask himself in
perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beinnin to reflect anew
on the meanin of the phenomena of life; but knowin by experience that
there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away from
them, and took up a book, or hurried off to the club or to Apollon
Nikolaevich's, to exchane the ossip of the town.

"Helene, who has never cared for anythin but her own body and is one of
the stupidest women in the world," thouht Pierre, "is rearded by
people as the acme of intellience and refinement, and they pay homae
to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as lon as he was reat,
but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants
to offer him his dauhter in an illeal marriae. The Spaniards, throuh
the Catholic clery, offer praise to od for their victory over the
French on the fourteenth of June, and the French, also throuh the
Catholic clery, offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June
they defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear by the blood that
they are ready to sacrifice everythin for their neihbor, but they do
not ive a ruble each to the collections for the poor, and they
intriue, the Astraea Lode aainst the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an
authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs, and the meanin
of which the very man who wrote it does not understand. We all profess
the Christian law of foriveness of injuries and love of our neihbors,
the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty
churches--but yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister
of that same law of love and foriveness, a priest, ave the soldier a
cross to kiss before his execution." So thouht Pierre, and the whole of
this eneral deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was to
it, astonished him each time as if it were somethin new. "I understand
the deception and confusion," he thouht, "but how am I to tell them all
that I see? I have tried, and have always found that they too in the
depths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not to see it.
So it appears that it must be so! But I--what is to become of me?"
thouht he. He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especially
Russians, have of seein and believin in the possibility of oodness
and truth, but of seein the evil and falsehood of life too clearly to
be able to take a serious part in it. Every sphere of work was
connected, in his eyes, with evil and deception. Whatever he tried to
be, whatever he enaed in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him
and blocked every path of activity. Yet he had to live and to find
occupation. It was too dreadful to be under the burden of these
insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in order
to foret them. He frequented every kind of society, drank much, bouht
pictures, enaed in buildin, and above all--read.

He read, and read everythin that came to hand. On comin home, while
his valets were still takin off his thins, he picked up a book and
bean to read. From readin he passed to sleepin, from sleepin to
ossip in drawin rooms of the club, from ossip to carousals and women;
from carousals back to ossip, readin, and wine. Drinkin became more
and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Thouh the doctors
warned him that with his corpulence wine was danerous for him, he drank
a reat deal. He was only quite at ease when havin poured several
lasses of wine mechanically into his lare mouth he felt a pleasant
warmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and a
readiness to respond superficially to every idea without probin it
deeply. Only after emptyin a bottle or two did he feel dimly that the
terribly tanled skein of life which previously had terrified him was
not as dreadful as he had thouht. He was always conscious of some
aspect of that skein, as with a buzzin in his head after dinner or
supper he chatted or listened to conversation or read. But under the
influence of wine he said to himself: "It doesn't matter. I'll et it
unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now--I'll think it
all out later on!" But the later on never came.

In the mornin, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as
insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and
if anyone came to see him he was lad.

Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when
entrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothin to do, try hard
to find some occupation the more easily to bear the daner. To Pierre
all men seemed like those soldiers, seekin refue from life: some in
ambition, some in cards, some in framin laws, some in women, some in
toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some in wine, and
some in overnmental affairs. "Nothin is trivial, and nothin is
important, it's all the same--only to save oneself from it as best one
can," thouht Pierre. "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"




CHAPTER II

At the beinnin of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his dauhter
moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's
reime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed
there, and this, toether with his past and his intellect and his
oriinality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of
particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow
opposition to the overnment.

The prince had aed very much that year. He showed marked sins of
senility by a tendency to fall asleep, foretfulness of quite recent
events, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which
he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this
the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feelin of respectful
veneration--especially of an evenin when he came in to tea in his old-
fashioned coat and powdered wi and, aroused by anyone, told his abrupt
stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathin criticisms
of the present. For them all, that old-fashioned house with its iantic
mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen, and the stern
shrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his entle
dauhter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to him
presented a majestic and areeable spectacle. But the visitors did not
reflect that besides the couple of hours durin which they saw their
host, there were also twenty-two hours in the day durin which the
private and intimate life of the house continued.

Latterly that private life had become very tryin for Princess Mary.
There in Moscow she was deprived of her reatest pleasures--talks with
the pilrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills--and she
had none of the advantaes and pleasures of city life. She did not o
out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her o
anywhere without him, and his failin health prevented his oin out
himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evenin parties. She
had quite abandoned the hope of ettin married. She saw the coldness
and malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed the
youn men, possible suitors, who sometimes appeared at their house. She
had no friends: durin this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed in
the two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom
she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant to
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
she had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow, but proved
to be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the
death of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,
was in the full whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by youn
men who, she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth.
Julie was at that stae in the life of a society woman when she feels
that her last chance of marryin has come and that her fate must be
decided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a
mournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whose
presence ave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like the
old emire who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent his
evenins for years, she reretted Julie's presence and havin no one to
write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to whom
to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then. The
time for Prince Andrew's return and marriae was approachin, but his
request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; in
fact, it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention
of the youn Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that was
usually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. Another lately added
sorrow arose from the lessons she ave her six year-old nephew. To her
consternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholas
some symptoms of her father's irritability. However often she told
herself that she must not et irritable when teachin her nephew, almost
every time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the French
alphabet, she so loned to pour her own knowlede quickly and easily
into the child--who was already afraid that Auntie miht at any moment
et anry--that at his slihtest inattention she trembled, became
flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the
arm and put him in the corner. Havin put him in the corner she would
herself bein to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas,
followin her example, would sob, and without permission would leave his
corner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort her.
But what distressed the princess most of all was her father's
irritability, which was always directed aainst her and had of late
amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to the
round all niht, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water, it
would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but this
lovin despot--the more cruel because he loved her and for that reason
tormented himself and her--knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate her
deliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame for
everythin. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented Princess
Mary more than anythin else; this was his ever-increasin intimacy with
Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of receivin
the news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jest--that if
Andrew ot married he himself would marry Bourienne--had evidently
pleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it seemed to
Princess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments to the
companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his dauhter by
demonstrations of love of Bourienne.

One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thouht her father
did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed Mademoiselle
Bourienne's hand and, drawin her to him, embraced her affectionately.
Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minutes later
Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smilin and makin
cheerful remarks in her areeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wiped
away her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
evidently unconscious of what she was doin bean shoutin in anry
haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breakin: "It's horrible, vile,
inhuman, to take advantae of the weakness..." She did not finish.
"Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.

Next day the prince did not say a word to his dauhter, but she noticed
that at dinner he ave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be
served first. After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and from
habit bean with the princess, the prince suddenly rew furious, threw
his stick at Philip, and instantly ave instructions to have him
conscripted for the army.

"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is the
first person in this house; she's my best friend," cried the prince.
"And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressin Princess
Mary for the first time, "to foret yourself aain before her as you
dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house. o!
Don't let me set eyes on you; be her pardon!"

Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also her
father's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had beed
for her intervention.

At such moments somethin like a pride of sacrifice athered in her
soul. And suddenly that father whom she had juded would look for his
spectacles in her presence, fumblin near them and not seein them, or
would foret somethin that had just occurred, or take a false step with
his failin les and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness,
or, worst of all, at dinner when there were no visitors to excite him
would suddenly fall asleep, lettin his napkin drop and his shakin head
sink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I dare to condemn him!"
she thouht at such moments, with a feelin of revulsion aainst
herself.




CHAPTER III

In 1811 there was livin in Moscow a French doctor--Metivier--who had
rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable as
Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily clever
doctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but
as an equal.

Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on
Mademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and
had rown accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twice
a week.

On December 6--St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day--all Moscow
came to the prince's front door but he ave orders to admit no one and
to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he ave to
Princess Mary.

Metivier, who came in the mornin with his felicitations, considered it
proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consine, * as he told
Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on that
mornin of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods. He had
been oin about the house all the mornin findin fault with everyone
and pretendin not to understand what was said to him and not to be
understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed
querulousness, which enerally culminated in a burst of rae, and she
went about all that mornin as thouh facin a cocked and loaded un and
awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's arrival the mornin
had passed off safely. After admittin the doctor, Princess Mary sat
down with a book in the drawin room near the door throuh which she
could hear all that passed in the study.


* To force the uard.

At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then both
voices bean speakin at the same time, the door was flun open, and on
the threshold appeared the handsome fiure of the terrified Metivier
with his shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressin own and
fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolled
downwards.

"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slave
of Buonaparte, spy, et out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."

Metivier, shruin his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who
at the sound of shoutin had run in from an adjoinin room.

"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head. Keep
calm, I will call aain tomorrow," said Metivier; and puttin his
finers to his lips he hastened away.

Throuh the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:
"Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own
house!"

After Metivier's departure the old prince called his dauhter in, and
the whole weiht of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spy
had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,
and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was that
scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, he
could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.

"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that, understand it!
I cannot endure any more," he said, and left the room. Then, as if
afraid she miht find some means of consolation, he returned and tryin
to appear calm added: "And don't imaine I have said this in a moment of
aner. I am calm. I have thouht it over, and it will be carried out--we
must part; so find some place for yourself...." But he could not
restrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves is
capable, evidently sufferin himself, he shook his fists at her and
screamed:

"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent for
Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.

At two o'clock the six chosen uests assembled for dinner.

These uests--the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his
nephew, eneral Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the
youner eneration Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince in
the drawin room.

Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been
anxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived
to inratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made an
exception to the rule of not receivin bachelors in his house.

The prince's house did not belon to what is known as fashionable
society, but his little circle--thouh not much talked about in town--
was one it was more flatterin to be received in than any other. Boris
had realized this the week before when the commander-in-chief in his
presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, and
Rostopchin had replied that he could not come:

"On that day I always o to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince
Nicholas Bolkonski."

"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander-in-chief. "How is he?..."

The small roup that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioned
drawin room with its old furniture resembled the solemn atherin of a
court of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. Prince
Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieter
and more diffident than usual. The uests were reluctant to address her,
feelin that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count Rostopchin
alone kept the conversation oin, now relatin the latest town news,
and now the latest political ossip.

Lopukhin and the old eneral occasionally took part in the conversation.
Prince Bolkonski listened as a presidin jude receives a report, only
now and then, silently or by a brief word, showin that he took heed of
what was bein reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such as
indicated that no one approved of what was bein done in the political
world. Incidents were related evidently confirmin the opinion that
everythin was oin from bad to worse, but whether tellin a story or
ivin an opinion the speaker always stopped, or was stopped, at the
point beyond which his criticism miht touch the soverein himself.

At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon's
seizure of the Duke of Oldenbur's territory, and the Russian Note,
hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.

"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count
Rostopchin, repeatin a phrase he had uttered several times before. "One
only wonders at the lon-sufferin or blindness of the crowned heads.
Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose the
head of the Catholic Church--yet all keep silent! Our soverein alone
has protested aainst the seizure of the Duke of Oldenbur's territory,
and even..." Count Rostopchin paused, feelin that he had reached the
limit beyond which censure was impossible.

"Other territories have been offered in exchane for the Duchy of
Oldenbur," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I miht
move my serfs from Bald Hills to Boucharovo or my Ryazan estates."

"The Duke of Oldenbur bears his misfortunes with admirable strenth of
character and resination," remarked Boris, joinin in respectfully.

He said this because on his journey from Petersbur he had had the honor
of bein presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski lanced at the youn
man as if about to say somethin in reply, but chaned his mind,
evidently considerin him too youn.

"I have read our protests about the Oldenbur affair and was surprised
how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual
tone of a man dealin with a subject quite familiar to him.

Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understandin
why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note.

"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so lon as
its substance is forcible?"

"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easy
to have a ood style," returned Count Rostopchin.

Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wordin of
the Note.

"One would have thouht quill drivers enouh had sprun up," remarked
the old prince. "There in Petersbur they are always writin--not notes
only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written a whole volume of
laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writin!" and he lauhed
unnaturally.

There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old eneral cleared
his throat to draw attention.

"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersbur? The fiure
cut by the new French ambassador."

"Eh? Yes, I heard somethin: he said somethin awkward in His Majesty's
presence."

"His Majesty drew attention to the renadier division and to the march
past," continued the eneral, "and it seems the ambassador took no
notice and allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay no attention
to such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At the next
review, they say, the Emperor did not once dein to address him."

All were silent. On this fact relatin to the Emperor personally, it was
impossible to pass any judment.

"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned him
out of my house this mornin. He was here; they admitted him in spite of
my request that they should let no one in," he went on, lancin anrily
at his dauhter.

And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and the
reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Thouh these reasons
were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.

After the roast, champane was served. The uests rose to conratulate
the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.

He ave her a cold, anry look and offered her his wrinkled, clean-
shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told her that he
had not forotten the mornin's talk, that his decision remained in
force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speakin of it to
her now.

When they went into the drawin room where coffee was served, the old
men sat toether.

Prince Nicholas rew more animated and expressed his views on the
impendin war.

He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so lon as we
souht alliances with the ermans and thrust ourselves into European
affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ouht
not to fiht either for or aainst Austria. Our political interests are
all in the East, and in reard to Bonaparte the only thin is to have an
armed frontier and a firm policy, and he will never dare to cross the
Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!"

"How can we fiht the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can we
arm ourselves aainst our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths,
look at our ladies! The French are our ods: Paris is our Kindom of
Heaven."

He bean speakin louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.

"French dresses, French ideas, French feelins! There now, you turned
Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and a
scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to a
party last niht, and there out of five ladies three were Roman
Catholics and had the Pope's indulence for doin woolwork on Sundays.
And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the sinboards at our
Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our youn people,
Prince, one would like to take Peter the reat's old cudel out of the
museum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumps
out of them."

All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile and
waed his head approvinly.

"Well, ood-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, ettin up
with characteristic briskness and holdin out his hand to the prince.

"ood-bye, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire of
hearin him!" said the old prince, keepin hold of the hand and offerin
his cheek to be kissed.

Followin Rostopchin's example the others also rose.




CHAPTER IV

Princess Mary as she sat listenin to the old men's talk and
faultfindin, understood nothin of what she heard; she only wondered
whether the uests had all observed her father's hostile attitude toward
her. She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities
shown her durin dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visitin them for
the third time already.

Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questionin look to Pierre, who
hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the uests to
approach her after the old prince had one out and they were left alone
in the drawin room.

"May I stay a little loner?" he said, lettin his stout body sink into
an armchair beside her.

"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothin?" her look asked.

Pierre was in an areeable after-dinner mood. He looked straiht before
him and smiled quietly.

"Have you known that youn man lon, Princess?" he asked.

"Who?"

"Drubetskoy."

"No, not lon..."

"Do you like him?"

"Yes, he is an areeable youn man.... Why do you ask me that?" said
Princess Mary, still thinkin of that mornin's conversation with her
father.

"Because I have noticed that when a youn man comes on leave from
Petersbur to Moscow it is usually with the object of marryin an
heiress."

"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.

"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this youn man now manaes
matters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. I can
read him like a book. At present he is hesitatin whom to lay siee to--
you or Mademoiselle Julie Karaina. He is very attentive to her."

"He visits them?"

"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courtin?" said Pierre
with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of ood humored
raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary.

"No," replied Princess Mary.

"To please Moscow irls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is very
melancholy with Mademoiselle Karaina," said Pierre.

"Really?" asked Princess Mary, lookin into Pierre's kindly face and
still thinkin of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thouht she,
"if I ventured to confide what I am feelin to someone. I should like to
tell everythin to Pierre. He is kind and enerous. It would be a
relief. He would ive me advice."

"Would you marry him?"

"Oh, my od, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she
cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, how
bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..." she went
on in a tremblin voice, "that you can do nothin for him but rieve
him, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then there is only one
thin left--to o away, but where could I o?"

"What is wron? What is it, Princess?"

But without finishin what she was sayin, Princess Mary burst into
tears.

"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any notice--
foret what I have said!"

Pierre's aiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned the
princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her rief to him; but
she only repeated that she beed him to foret what she had said, that
she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble
except the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriae threatened to
cause a rupture between father and son.

"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to chane the subject. "I
was told they are comin soon. I am also expectin Andrew any day. I
should like them to meet here."

"And how does he now reard the matter?" asked Pierre, referrin to the
old prince.

Princess Mary shook her head.

"What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thin is
impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I
wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You have
known them a lon time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me honestly the whole
truth: what sort of irl is she, and what do you think of her?--The real
truth, because you know Andrew is riskin so much doin this aainst his
father's will that I should like to know..."

An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeated
requests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the princess'
part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that he should
disapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said what he felt rather
than what he thouht.

"I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushin without
knowin why. "I really don't know what sort of irl she is; I can't
analyze her at all. She is enchantin, but what makes her so I don't
know. That is all one can say about her."

Princess Mary sihed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that's
what I expected and feared."

"Is she clever?" she asked.

Pierre considered.

"I think not," he said, "and yet--yes. She does not dein to be
clever.... Oh no, she is simply enchantin, and that is all."

Princess Mary aain shook her head disapprovinly.

"Ah, I so lon to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."

"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.

Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future
sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the
old prince to her.




CHAPTER V

Boris had not succeeded in makin a wealthy match in Petersbur, so with
the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between the
two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Thouh Princess Mary
despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he,
without knowin why, felt awkward about payin court to her. When they
had last met on the old prince's name day, she had answered at random
all his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidently not listenin to what
he was sayin.

Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, thouh in a
manner peculiar to herself.

She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had become
very wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thouht herself not
merely as ood-lookin as before but even far more attractive. She was
confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a very
wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she rew the less
danerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate
with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated
company that assembled at her house, without incurrin any obliation. A
man who would have been afraid ten years before of oin every day to
the house when there was a irl of seventeen there, for fear of
compromisin her and committin himself, would now o boldly every day
and treat her not as a marriaeable irl but as a sexless acquaintance.

That winter the Karains' house was the most areeable and hospitable in
Moscow. In addition to the formal evenin and dinner parties, a lare
company, chiefly of men, athered there every day, suppin at midniht
and stayin till three in the mornin. Julie never missed a ball, a
promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion. But
in spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everythin and
told everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in love,
or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder." She
adopted the tone of one who has suffered a reat disappointment, like a
irl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by
him. Thouh nothin of the kind had happened to her she was rearded in
that liht, and had even herself come to believe that she had suffered
much in life. This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusin
herself, did not hinder the youn people who came to her house from
passin the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid
his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused
himself with society ossip, dancin, intellectual ames, and bouts
rimes, which were in voue at the Karains'. Only a few of these youn
men, amon them Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and
with these she had proloned conversations in private on the vanity of
all worldly thins, and to them she showed her albums filled with
mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.

To Boris, Julie was particularly racious: she reretted his early
disillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship as
she who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him her
album. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees,
your dark branches shed loom and melancholy upon me."

On another pae he drew a tomb, and wrote:


La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille. Ah! contre les
douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. *


* Death ives relief and death is peaceful.

Ah! from sufferin there is no other refue.

Julie said this was charmin

"There is somethin so enchantin in the smile of melancholy," she said
to Boris, repeatin word for word a passae she had copied from a book.
"It is a ray of liht in the darkness, a shade between sadness and
despair, showin the possibility of consolation."

In reply Boris wrote these lines:


Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible, Toi, sans qui le bonheur me
serait impossible, Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler, Viens
calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite, Et mele une douceur secrete
A ces pleurs que je sens couler. *


*Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul, Thou, without whom
happiness would for me be impossible, Tender melancholy, ah, come to
console me, Come to calm the torments of my loomy retreat, And minle a
secret sweetness With these tears that I feel to be flowin.

For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read
'Poor Liza' aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the readin
because of the emotions that choked him. Meetin at lare atherins
Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who understood
one another in a world of indifferent people.

Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karains, while playin cards
with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was to
have two estates in Penza and the Nizheorod forests). Anna Mikhaylovna
rearded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Julie
with emotion, and resination to the Divine will.

"You are always charmin and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to the
dauhter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He has
suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to the
mother. "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have rown of Julie
latterly," she said to her son. "But who could help lovin her? She is
an anelic bein! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused. "And how I pity her
mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and letters from
Penza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poor thin, has no
one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"

Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listenin to his mother. He
lauhed blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she had to
say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza and
Nizheorod estates.

Julie had lon been expectin a proposal from her melancholy adorer and
was ready to accept it; but some secret feelin of repulsion for her,
for her passionate desire to et married, for her artificiality, and a
feelin of horror at renouncin the possibility of real love still
restrained Boris. His leave was expirin. He spent every day and whole
days at the Karains', and every day on thinkin the matter over told
himself that he would propose tomorrow. But in Julie's presence, lookin
at her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist eyes, and
her expression of continual readiness to pass at once from melancholy to
an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter the
decisive words, thouh in imaination he had lon rearded himself as
the possessor of those Penza and Nizheorod estates and had apportioned
the use of the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and
sometimes the thouht occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but
her feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation,
and she told herself that he was only shy from love. Her melancholy,
however, bean to turn to irritability, and not lon before Boris'
departure she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leave of
absence was expirin, Anatole Kurain made his appearance in Moscow, and
of course in the Karains' drawin room, and Julie, suddenly abandonin
her melancholy, became cheerful and very attentive to Kurain.

"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliable
source that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to et him married
to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her. What do
you think of it, my dear?"

The idea of bein made a fool of and of havin thrown away that whole
month of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seein all the
revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally apportioned
and put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and especially
into the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to the
Karains' with the firm intention of proposin. Julie met him in a ay,
careless manner, spoke casually of how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball,
and asked when he was leavin. Thouh Boris had come intentionally to
speak of his love and therefore meant to be tender, he bean speakin
irritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women can turn from
sadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens to be
payin court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was true
that a woman needs variety, and the same thin over and over aain would
weary anyone.

"Then I should advise you..." Boris bean, wishin to stin her; but at
that instant the allin thouht occurred to him that he miht have to
leave Moscow without havin accomplished his aim, and have vainly wasted
his efforts--which was a thin he never allowed to happen.

He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes to
avoid seein her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:

"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."

He lanced at her to make sure that he miht o on. Her irritability had
suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, implorin eyes were fixed on
him with reedy expectation. "I can always arrane so as not to see her
often," thouht Boris. "The affair has been beun and must be finished!"
He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:

"You know my feelins for you!"

There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and self-
satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on such
occasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other woman more
than her. She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizheorod forests she
could demand this, and she received what she demanded.

The affianced couple, no loner alludin to trees that shed loom and
melancholy upon them, planned the arranements of a splendid house in
Petersbur, paid calls, and prepared everythin for a brilliant weddin.




CHAPTER VI

At the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natasha and
Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it was
impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected in
Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near
Moscow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presentin his
future dauhter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscow
could not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that
winter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess was
not with them, the count decided to stay with Marya Dmitrievna
Akhrosimova, who had lon been pressin her hospitality on them.

Late one evenin the Rostovs' four sleihs drove into Marya Dmitrievna's
courtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone.
She had already married off her dauhter, and her sons were all in the
service.

She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,
loudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearin seemed a reproach to
others for any weakness, passion, or temptation--the possibility of
which she did not admit. From early in the mornin, wearin a dressin
jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:
on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on
affairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, after
dressin, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom there
were always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizin meal
at which there were always three or four uests; after dinner she played
a ame of boston, and at niht she had the newspapers or a new book read
to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out to
pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.

She had not yet one to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley of
the hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and their
servants. Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanin down on her nose
and her head flun back, stood in the hall doorway lookin with a stern,
rim face at the new arrivals. One miht have thouht she was anry with
the travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she not at the
same time been ivin careful instructions to the servants for the
accommodation of the visitors and their belonins.

"The count's thins? Brin them here," she said, pointin to the
portmanteaus and not reetin anyone. "The youn ladies'? There to the
left. Now what are you dawdlin for?" she cried to the maids. "et the
samovar ready!... You've rown plumper and prettier," she remarked,
drawin Natasha (whose cheeks were lowin from the cold) to her by the
hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your thins, quick!" she shouted
to the count who was oin to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen, I'm
sure! Brin some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" she added,
turnin to Sonya and indicatin by this French reetin her slihtly
contemptuous thouh affectionate attitude toward her.

When they came in to tea, havin taken off their outdoor thins and
tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them
all in due order.

"I'm heartily lad you have come and are stayin with me. It was hih
time," she said, ivin Natasha a sinificant look. "The old man is here
and his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance.
But we'll speak of that later on," she added, lancin at Sonya with a
look that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence. "Now
listen," she said to the count. "What do you want tomorrow? Whom will
you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of her finers. "The snivelin
Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with her son. The son is
ettin married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. He
ran away from her and she came allopin after him. He dined with me on
Wednesday. As for them"--and she pointed to the irls--"tomorrow I'll
take them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of od, and then
we'll drive to the Super-Roue's. I suppose you'll have everythin new.
Don't jude by me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day youn
Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful siht--looked
as if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes now
without some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she
asked the count sternly.

"One thin has come on top of another: her ras to buy, and now a
purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you
will be so kind, I'll fix a time and o down to the estate just for a
day, and leave my lassies with you."

"All riht. All riht. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery!
I'll take them where they must o, scold them a bit, and pet them a
bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touchin her oddauhter and favorite,
Natasha, on the cheek with her lare hand.

Next mornin Marya Dmitrievna took the youn ladies to the Iberian
shrine of the Mother of od and to Madame Suppert-Rouet, who was so
afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a
loss merely to et rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the whole
trousseau. When they ot home she turned everybody out of the room
except Natasha, and then called her pet to her armchair.

"Well, now we'll talk. I conratulate you on your betrothed. You've
hooked a fine fellow! I am lad for your sake and I've known him since
he was so hih." She held her hand a couple of feet from the round.
Natasha blushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Now listen! You
know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son's marryin. The old
fellow's crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift
without him, but it's not nice to enter a family aainst a father's
will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovinly. You're a clever irl
and you'll know how to manae. Be kind, and use your wits. Then all will
be well."

Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, but
really because she disliked anyone interferin in what touched her love
of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs
that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he
loved her only, and was to come one of these days and take her. She
wanted nothin more.

"You see I have known him a lon time and am also fond of Mary, your
future sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters brin up blisters,' but this
one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to brin you two toether.
Tomorrow you'll o with your father to see her. Be very nice and
affectionate to her: you're youner than she. When he comes, he'll find
you already know his sister and father and are liked by them. Am I riht
or not? Won't that be best?"

"Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.




CHAPTER VII

Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha to
call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfully
on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the last
interview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment,
when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to an
anry reprimand for not havin provided his full quota of men. Natasha,
on the other hand, havin put on her best own, was in the hihest
spirits. "They can't help likin me," she thouht. "Everybody always has
liked me, and I am so willin to do anythin they wish, so ready to be
fond of him--for bein his father--and of her--for bein his sister--
that there is no reason for them not to like me..."

They drove up to the loomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and entered
the vestibule.

"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half in
earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on enterin
the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince and
princess were at home.

When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable amon the
servants. The footman who had one to announce them was stopped by
another in the lare hall and they whispered to one another. Then a
maidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said somethin, mentionin
the princess. At last an old, cross lookin footman came and announced
to the Rostovs that the prince was not receivin, but that the princess
beed them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitors
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She reeted the father and dauhter with
special politeness and showed them to the princess' room. The princess,
lookin excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to meet
the visitors, treadin heavily, and vainly tryin to appear cordial and
at ease. From the first lance Princess Mary did not like Natasha. She
thouht her too fashionably dressed, frivolously ay and vain. She did
not at all realize that before havin seen her future sister-in-law she
was prejudiced aainst her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth, and
happiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart
from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was aitated just
then because on the Rostovs' bein announced, the old prince had shouted
that he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary miht do so if she
chose, but they were not to be admitted to him. She had decided to
receive them, but feared lest the prince miht at any moment indule in
some freak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.

"There, my dear princess, I've brouht you my sonstress," said the
count, bowin and lookin round uneasily as if afraid the old prince
miht appear. "I am so lad you should et to know one another... very
sorry the prince is still ailin," and after a few more commonplace
remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your hands
for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see Anna
Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dos' Square, and then I'll come back
for her."

The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told his
dauhter) to ive the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk to
one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the daner of
encounterin the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mention
this to his dauhter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness and
anxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, rew still
anrier at havin blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold and
defiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody. The
princess told the count that she would be delihted, and only beed him
to stay loner at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.

Despite the uneasy lances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who wished to
have a tête-à-tête with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in the
room and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters.
Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom,
by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princess
who--she thouht--was makin a favor of receivin her, and so everythin
displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thouht very
plain, affected, and dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and
involuntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still
more. After five minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they
heard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approachin. Princess Mary
looked frihtened.

The door opened and the old prince, in a dressin own and a white
nihtcap, came in.

"Ah, madam!" he bean. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am not
mistaken... I be you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did not know,
madam. od is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with a
visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my dauhter. I be you
to excuse me... od is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,
stressin the word "od" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that
Princess Mary stood with downcast eyes not darin to look either at her
father or at Natasha.

Nor did the latter, havin risen and curtsied, know what to do.
Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled areeably.

"I be you to excuse me, excuse me! od is my witness, I did not know,"
muttered the old man, and after lookin Natasha over from head to foot
he went out.

Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after this
apparition and bean speakin about the prince's indisposition. Natasha
and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the loner they
did so without sayin what they wanted to say, the reater rew their
antipathy to one another.

When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened to
et away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who
could place her in such an embarrassin position and had spent half an
hour with her without once mentionin Prince Andrew. "I couldn't bein
talkin about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thouht Natasha.
The same thouht was meanwhile tormentin Princess Mary. She knew what
she ouht to have said to Natasha, but she had been unable to say it
because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, and because, without
knowin why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriae. When
the count was already leavin the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedly
to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep sih:

"Wait, I must..."

Natasha lanced at her ironically without knowin why.

"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I am lad
my brother has found happiness...."

She paused, feelin that she was not tellin the truth. Natasha noticed
this and uessed its reason.

"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she said
with external dinity and coldness, thouh she felt the tears chokin
her.

"What have I said and what have I done?" thouht she, as soon as she was
out of the room.

They waited a lon time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She sat
in her room cryin like a child, blowin her nose and sobbin. Sonya
stood beside her, kissin her hair.

"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you? It
will all pass, Natasha."

"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."

"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should you
mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.

Natasha raised her head and, kissin her friend on the lips, pressed her
wet face aainst her.

"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha--"It's
my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come?..."

She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how the
prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset
Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and
the other uests.




CHAPTER VIII

That evenin the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievna
had taken a box.

Natasha did not want to o, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kind
offer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready dressed
into the ballroom to await her father, and lookin in the lare mirror
there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but
it was a sweet, tender sadness.

"O od, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, but
differently. I would not be silly and afraid of thins, I would simply
embrace him, clin to him, and make him look at me with those searchin
inquirin eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I would
make him lauh as he used to lauh. And his eyes--how I see those eyes!"
thouht Natasha. "And what do his father and sister matter to me? I love
him alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with his smile,
manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not think of him; not think
of him but foret him, quite foret him for the present. I can't bear
this waitin and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from the
lass, makin an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas so
calmly and quietly and wait so lon and so patiently?" thouht she,
lookin at Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand.
"No, she's altoether different. I can't!"

Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was not
enouh for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at
once, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of
love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriae beside her
father, pensively watchin the lihts of the street lamps flickerin on
the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forot
where she was oin and with whom. Havin fallen into the line of
carriaes, the Rostovs' carriae drove up to the theater, its wheels
squeakin over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holdin up their dresses,
jumped out quickly. The count ot out helped by the footmen, and,
passin amon men and women who were enterin and the proram sellers,
they all three went alon the corridor to the first row of boxes.
Throuh the closed doors the music was already audible.

"Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.

An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies and
opened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and throuh the
door rows of brihtly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms and
shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, littered before
their eyes. A lady enterin the next box shot a lance of feminine envy
at Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was bein
played. Natasha, smoothin her own, went in with Sonya and sat down,
scannin the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had not
experienced for a lon time--that of hundreds of eyes lookin at her
bare arms and neck--suddenly affected her both areeably and
disareeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desires and
emotions associated with that feelin.

The two remarkably pretty irls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov
who had not been seen in Moscow for a lon time, attracted eneral
attention. Moreover, everybody knew vauely of Natasha's enaement to
Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ever
since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was makin one of
the best matches in Russia.

Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country, and
that evenin thanks to her aitation she was particularly pretty. She
struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined
with her indifference to everythin about her. Her black eyes looked at
the crowd without seekin anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to above
the elbow, lay on the velvet ede of the box, while, evidently
unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,
crumplin her proram. "Look, there's Alenina," said Sonya, "with her
mother, isn't it?"

"Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has rown still stouter!" remarked the
count.

"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna--what a headdress she has on!"

"The Karains, Julie--and Boris with them. One can see at once that
they're enaed...."

"Drubetskoy has proposed?"

"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, comin into the Rostovs' box.

Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes were turned
and saw Julie sittin beside her mother with a happy look on her face
and a strin of pearls round her thick red neck--which Natasha knew was
covered with powder. Behind them, wearin a smile and leanin over with
an ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. He
looked at the Rostovs from under his brows and said somethin, smilin,
to his betrothed.

"They are talkin about us, about me and him!" thouht Natasha. "And he
no doubt is calmin her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves!
If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them."

Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearin a reen headdress and with a
happy look of resination to the will of od on her face. Their box was
pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew so
well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all that
had been so humiliatin in her mornin's visit.

"What riht has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh, better
not think of it--not till he comes back!" she told herself, and bean
lookin at the faces, some strane and some familiar, in the stalls. In
the front, in the very center, leanin back aainst the orchestra rail,
stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a hue
shock. He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he was
attractin everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as thouh he were
in his own room. Around him throned Moscow's most brilliant youn men,
whom he evidently dominated.

The count, lauhin, nuded the blushin Sonya and pointed to her former
adorer.

"Do you reconize him?" said he. "And where has he sprun from?" he
asked, turnin to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"

"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away from
there. They say he has been actin as minister to some rulin prince in
Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the Moscow ladies
are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We never
hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him, they offer him
to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov and Anatole
Kurain have turned all our ladies' heads."

A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposed
plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double strin of
lare pearls, entered the adjoinin box rustlin her heavy silk dress
and took a lon time settlin into her place.

Natasha involuntarily azed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearls
and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.
While Natasha was fixin her aze on her for the second time the lady
looked round and, meetin the count's eyes, nodded to him and smiled.
She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew
everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.

"Have you been here lon, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll call
to kiss your hand. I'm here on business and have brouht my irls with
me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never used to
foret us. Is he here?"

"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and lanced attentively at
Natasha.

Count Rostov resumed his seat.

"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.

"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily fall in
love with."

Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductor
tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,
and the curtain rose.

As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, and
all the men, old and youn, in uniform and evenin dress, and all the
women with ems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention with
eaer curiosity to the stae. Natasha too bean to look at it.




CHAPTER IX

The floor of the stae consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was some
painted cardboard representin trees, and at the back was a cloth
stretched over boards. In the center of the stae sat some irls in red
bodices and white skirts. One very fat irl in a white silk dress sat
apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of reen cardboard
was lued. They all san somethin. When they had finished their son
the irl in white went up to the prompter's box and a man with tiht
silk trousers over his stout les, and holdin a plume and a daer,
went up to her and bean sinin, wavin his arms about.

First the man in the tiht trousers san alone, then she san, then they
both paused while the orchestra played and the man finered the hand of
the irl in white, obviously awaitin the beat to start sinin with
her. They san toether and everyone in the theater bean clappin and
shoutin, while the man and woman on the stae--who represented lovers--
bean smilin, spreadin out their arms, and bowin.

After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this
seemed rotesque and amazin to Natasha. She could not follow the opera
nor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and the
queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke, and san so stranely in
that brilliant liht. She knew what it was all meant to represent, but
it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamed
for the actors and then amused at them. She looked at the faces of the
audience, seekin in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she
herself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happenin
on the stae, and expressed deliht which to Natasha seemed feined. "I
suppose it has to be like this!" she thouht. She kept lookin round in
turn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the seminude
women in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box, who--
apparently quite unclothed--sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not takin
her eyes off the stae. And feelin the briht liht that flooded the
whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little by
little bean to pass into a state of intoxication she had not
experienced for a lon while. She did not realize who and where she was,
nor what was oin on before her. As she looked and thouht, the
stranest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed throuh her
mind: the idea occurred to her of jumpin onto the ede of the box and
sinin the air the actress was sinin, then she wished to touch with
her fan an old entleman sittin not far from her, then to lean over to
Helene and tickle her.

At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a son, a door
leadin to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and
the steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kurain!" whispered
Shinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smilin to the newcomer, and
Natasha, followin the direction of that look, saw an exceptionally
handsome adjutant approachin their box with a self-assured yet
courteous bearin. This was Anatole Kurain whom she had seen and
noticed lon ao at the ball in Petersbur. He was now in an adjutant's
uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot. He moved with a restrained
swaer which would have been ridiculous had he not been so ood-lookin
and had his handsome face not worn such an expression of ood-humored
complacency and aiety. Thouh the performance was proceedin, he walked
deliberately down the carpeted anway, his sword and spurs slihtly
jinlin and his handsome perfumed head held hih. Havin looked at
Natasha he approached his sister, laid his well loved hand on the ede
of her box, nodded to her, and leanin forward asked a question, with a
motion toward Natasha.

"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referrin to Natasha, who did not
exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his
lips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down
beside Dolokhov, nudin with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way
that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawninly. He winked at him aily,
smiled, and rested his foot aainst the orchestra screen.

"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And how
handsome they both are!"

Shinshin, lowerin his voice, bean to tell the count of some intriue
of Kurain's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because he
had said she was "charmante."

The first act was over. In the stalls everyone bean movin about, oin
out and comin in.

Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their conratulations very
simply, and raisin his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed to
Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her weddin, and went
away. Natasha with a ay, coquettish smile talked to him, and
conratulated on his approachin weddin that same Boris with whom she
had formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,
everythin seemed simple and natural.

The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and Natasha
ave Boris a similar smile.

Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the most
distinuished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one another
in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.

Durin the whole of that entr'acte Kurain stood with Dolokhov in front
of the orchestra partition, lookin at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew he
was talkin about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned so
that he should see her profile in what she thouht was its most becomin
aspect. Before the beinnin of the second act Pierre appeared in the
stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since their arrival. His face
looked sad, and he had rown still stouter since Natasha last saw him.
He passed up to the front rows, not noticin anyone. Anatole went up to
him and bean speakin to him, lookin at and indicatin the Rostovs'
box. On seein Natasha Pierre rew animated and, hastily passin between
the rows, came toward their box. When he ot there he leaned on his
elbows and, smilin, talked to her for a lon time. While conversin
with Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box and
somethin told her it was Kurain. She turned and their eyes met. Almost
smilin, he azed straiht into her eyes with such an enraptured
caressin look that it seemed strane to be so near him, to look at him
like that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with
him.

In the second act there was scenery representin tombstones, there was a
round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over
the footlihts, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while many
people appeared from riht and left wearin black cloaks and holdin
thins like daers in their hands. They bean wavin their arms. Then
some other people ran in and bean drain away the maiden who had been
in white and was now in liht blue. They did not dra her away at once,
but san with her for a lon time and then at last draed her off, and
behind the scenes somethin metallic was struck three times and everyone
knelt down and san a prayer. All these thins were repeatedly
interrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.

Durin this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she saw
Anatole Kurain with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, starin
at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it did
not occur to her that there was anythin wron in it.

When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the
Rostovs' box--her whole bosom completely exposed--beckoned the old count
with a loved finer, and payin no attention to those who had entered
her box bean talkin to him with an amiable smile.

"Do make me acquainted with your charmin dauhters," said she. "The
whole town is sinin their praises and I don't even know them!"

Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was so pleased
by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.

"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is it you're
not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"

Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of bein a fascinatin
woman. She could say what she did not think--especially what was
flatterin--quite simply and naturally.

"Dear count, you must let me look after your dauhters! Thouh I am not
stayin here lon this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse them. I
have already heard much of you in Petersbur and wanted to et to know
you," said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile. "I had
heard about you from my pae, Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is ettin
married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince Andrew
Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implyin that she knew of
his relation to Natasha. To et better acquainted she asked that one of
the youn ladies should come into her box for the rest of the
performance, and Natasha moved over to it.

The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candles
were burnin and pictures of knihts with short beards hun on the
walls. In the middle stood what were probably a kin and a queen. The
kin waved his riht arm and, evidently nervous, san somethin badly
and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in white
and then in liht blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside the
throne with her hair down. She san somethin mournfully, addressin the
queen, but the kin waved his arm severely, and men and women with bare
les came in from both sides and bean dancin all toether. Then the
violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick
bare les and thin arms, separatin from the others, went behind the
wins, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stae, and
bean jumpin and strikin one foot rapidly aainst the other. In the
stalls everyone clapped and shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went
into a corner of the stae. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra
struck up more loudly, and this man with bare les jumped very hih and
waved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty
thousand rubles a year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,
and alleries bean clappin and shoutin with all their miht, and the
man stopped and bean smilin and bowin to all sides. Then other men
and women danced with bare les. Then the kin aain shouted to the
sound of music, and they all bean sinin. But suddenly a storm came
on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in the
orchestra, everyone ran off, aain drain one of their number away,
and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise and
clatter amon the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone bean
shoutin: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no loner thouht this
strane. She looked about with pleasure, smilin joyfully.

"Isn't Duport delihtful?" Helene asked her.

"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.




CHAPTER X

Durin the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, the
door opened, and Anatole entered, stoopin and tryin not to brush
aainst anyone.

"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shiftin
uneasily from Natasha to Anatole.

Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the eleant youn officer
and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsome
at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her he
had lon wished to have this happiness--ever since the Naryshkins' ball
in fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seein her.
Kurain was much more sensible and simple with women than amon men. He
talked boldly and naturally, and Natasha was stranely and areeably
struck by the fact that there was nothin formidable in this man about
whom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his smile was most
naive, cheerful, and ood-natured.

Kurain asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at a
previous performance Semenova had fallen down on the stae.

"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressin her as an old,
familiar acquaintance, "we are ettin up a costume tournament; you
ouht to take part in it! It will be reat fun. We shall all meet at the
Karains'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.

While sayin this he never removed his smilin eyes from her face, her
neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was enraptured
by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel constrained and
oppressed. When she was not lookin at him she felt that he was lookin
at her shoulders, and she involuntarily cauht his eye so that he should
look into hers rather than this. But lookin into his eyes she was
frihtened, realizin that there was not that barrier of modesty she had
always felt between herself and other men. She did not know how it was
that within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near to
this man. When she turned away she feared he miht seize her from behind
by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of most ordinary
thins, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she had
ever been to any man. Natasha kept turnin to Helene and to her father,
as if askin what it all meant, but Helene was enaed in conversation
with a eneral and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said
nothin but what they always said: "Havin a ood time? Well, I'm lad
of it!"

Durin one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent
eyes were azin calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the
silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question and
blushed. She felt all the time that by talkin to him she was doin
somethin improper. Anatole smiled as thouh to encourae her.

"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant ce
sont les jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much
indeed," he said, lookin at her sinificantly. "You'll come to the
costume tournament, Countess? Do come!" and puttin out his hand to her
bouquet and droppin his voice, he added, "You will be the prettiest
there. Do come, dear countess, and ive me this flower as a plede!"


* Are the pretty women.

Natasha did not understand what he was sayin any more than he did
himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improper
intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if she had
not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt that
he was there, behind, so close behind her.

"How is he now? Confused? Anry? Ouht I to put it riht?" she asked
herself, and she could not refrain from turnin round. She looked
straiht into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the ood-
natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just as he
was doin, azin straiht into his eyes. And aain she felt with horror
that no barrier lay between him and her.

The curtain rose aain. Anatole left the box, serene and ay. Natasha
went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to the
world she found herself in. All that was oin on before her now seemed
quite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thouhts of her
betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not once
recur to her mind and were as if belonin to a remote past.

In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who san wavin his arm
about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeared
down below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw.
She felt aitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kurain whom
she could not help watchin. As they were leavin the theater Anatole
came up to them, called their carriae, and helped them in. As he was
puttin Natasha in he pressed her arm above the elbow. Aitated and
flushed she turned round. He was lookin at her with litterin eyes,
smilin tenderly.

Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think over
what had happened to her, and suddenly rememberin Prince Andrew she was
horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera, she
ave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.

"O od! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She sat
for a lon time hidin her flushed face in her hands tryin to realize
what had happened to her, but was unable either to understand what had
happened or what she felt. Everythin seemed dark, obscure, and
terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater where the bare-
leed Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the music
on wet boards, and youn irls and old men, and the nearly naked Helene
with her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried "bravo!"--there in the
presence of that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple; but now,
alone by herself, it was incomprehensible. "What is it? What was that
terror I felt of him? What is this nawin of conscience I am feelin
now?" she thouht.

Only to the old countess at niht in bed could Natasha have told all she
was feelin. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views would
either not understand it at all or would be horrified at such a
confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturin her by herself.

"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with
soothin irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen
to me? Nothin! I have done nothin, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobody
will know and I shall never see him aain," she told herself. "So it is
plain that nothin has happened and there is nothin to repent of, and
Andrew can love me still. But why 'still?' O od, why isn't he here?"
Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but aain some instinct told her
that thouh all this was true, and thouh nothin had happened, yet the
former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished. And aain in
imaination she went over her whole conversation with Kurain, and aain
saw the face, estures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man when
he pressed her arm.




CHAPTER XI

Anatole Kurain was stayin in Moscow because his father had sent him
away from Petersbur, where he had been spendin twenty thousand rubles
a year in cash, besides runnin up debts for as much more, which his
creditors demanded from his father.

His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for the
last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant to
the commander-in-chief--a post his father had procured for him--and
would at last try to make a ood match there. He indicated to him
Princess Mary and Julie Karaina.

Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's house.
Pierre received him unwillinly at first, but ot used to him after a
while, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and ave him
money under the uise of loans.

As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole had
turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that he
slihted them and plainly preferred the ypsy irls and French
actresses--with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle eore, he was said to
be on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at Danilov's or
other Moscow revelers', drank whole nihts throuh, outvyin everyone
else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society. There
was talk of his intriues with some of the ladies, and he flirted with a
few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried irls,
especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was a
special reason for this, as he had ot married two years before--a fact
known only to his most intimate friends. At that time while with his
reiment in Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had forced him to
marry his dauhter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and, for a
payment which he areed to send to his father-in-law, had arraned to be
free to pass himself off as a bachelor.

Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and with
others. He was instinctively and thorouhly convinced that it was
impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he had
never in his life done anythin base. He was incapable of considerin
how his actions miht affect others or what the consequences of this or
that action of his miht be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made
that it must live in water, so od had made him such that he must spend
thirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position in
society. He believed this so firmly that others, lookin at him, were
persuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leadin place in
society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone and
evidently would not repay.

He was not a ambler, at any rate he did not care about winnin. He was
not vain. He did not mind what people thouht of him. Still less could
he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father by
spoilin his own career, and he lauhed at distinctions of all kinds. He
was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared
about was aiety and women, and as accordin to his ideas there was
nothin dishonorable in these tastes, and he was incapable of
considerin what the ratification of his tastes entailed for others, he
honestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised roues
and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head hih.

Rakes, those male Madalenes, have a secret feelin of innocence similar
to that which female Madalenes have, based on the same hope of
foriveness. "All will be foriven her, for she loved much; and all will
be foriven him, for he enjoyed much."

Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and his
Persian adventures, and was leadin a life of luxury, amblin, and
dissipation, associated with his old Petersbur comrade Kurain and made
use of him for his own ends.

Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.
Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kurain's name, position, and connections
as a bait to draw rich youn men into his amblin set, made use of him
and amused himself at his expense without lettin the other feel it.
Apart from the advantae he derived from Anatole, the very process of
dominatin another's will was in itself a pleasure, a habit, and a
necessity to Dolokhov.

Natasha had made a stron impression on Kurain. At supper after the
opera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur the
attractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed his
intention of makin love to her. Anatole had no notion and was incapable
of considerin what miht come of such love-makin, as he never had any
notion of the outcome of any of his actions.

"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied Dolokhov.

"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"

"You'd better wait till she's married...."

"You know, I adore little irls, they lose their heads at once," pursued
Anatole.

"You have been cauht once already by a 'little irl,'" said Dolokhov
who knew of Kurain's marriae. "Take care!"

"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a ood-humored
lauh.




CHAPTER XII

The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to see
them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about somethin which they
concealed from Natasha. Natasha uessed they were talkin about the old
prince and plannin somethin, and this disquieted and offended her. She
was expectin Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a
manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He had
not arrived. She suffered more now than durin her first days in Moscow.
To her impatience and pinin for him were now added the unpleasant
recollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince, and
a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause. She
continually fancied that either he would never come or that somethin
would happen to her before he came. She could no loner think of him by
herself calmly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as she
bean to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess
Mary, of the theater, and of Kurain minled with her thouhts. The
question aain presented itself whether she was not uilty, whether she
had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and aain she found
herself recallin to the minutest detail every word, every esture, and
every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had
been able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifyin
feelin. To the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was
far less tranquil and happy than before.

On Sunday mornin Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at her
parish church--the Church of the Assumption built over the raves of
victims of the plaue.

"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently pridin
herself on her independence of thouht. "od is the same everywhere. We
have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with
dinity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is there in ivin
concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just self-indulence!"

Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her whole
house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor the
servants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. At
her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka
and roast oose or sucklin pi. But in nothin in the house was the
holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which
on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.

After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dinin room where
the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servant
announced that the carriae was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with a
stern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and
announced that she was oin to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an
explanation with him about Natasha.

After she had one, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Rouet waited on
the Rostovs, and Natasha, very lad of this diversion, havin shut
herself into a room adjoinin the drawin room, occupied herself tryin
on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and
only tacked toether, and was turnin her head to see in the lass how
the back fitted, she heard in the drawin room the animated sounds of
her father's voice and another's--a woman's--that made her flush. It was
Helene. Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the door
opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a purple velvet own with a
hih collar, came into the room beamin with ood-humored amiable
smiles.

"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushin Natasha. "Charmin! No,
this is really beyond anythin, my dear count," said she to Count Rostov
who had followed her in. "How can you live in Moscow and o nowhere? No,
I won't let you off! Mademoiselle eore will recite at my house toniht
and there'll be some people, and if you don't brin your lovely irls--
who are prettier than Mademoiselle eore--I won't know you! My husband
is away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You must come. You
positively must! Between eiht and nine."

She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsied
respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside the
lookin lass, drapin the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She
did not cease chatterin ood-naturedly and aily, continually praisin
Natasha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as
well as a new dress of her own made of "metallic auze," which she had
received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one like it.

"But anythin suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.

A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as if
she were blossomin under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who
had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now
so kind to her. Natasha brihtened up and felt almost in love with this
woman, who was so beautiful and so kind. Helene for her part was
sincerely delihted with Natasha and wished to ive her a ood time.
Anatole had asked her to brin him and Natasha toether, and she was
callin on the Rostovs for that purpose. The idea of throwin her
brother and Natasha toether amused her.

Thouh at one time, in Petersbur, she had been annoyed with Natasha for
drawin Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own way
heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leavin the Rostovs she called
her proteee aside.

"My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of lauhter--he ate
nothin and kept sihin for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly,
in love with you, my dear."

Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.

"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You must
certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reason
to shut yourself up. Even if you are enaed, I am sure your fiance
would wish you to o into society rather than be bored to death."

"So she knows I am enaed, and she and her husband Pierre--that ood
Pierre--have talked and lauhed about this. So it's all riht." And
aain, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed
simple and natural. "And she is such a rande dame, so kind, and
evidently likes me so much. And why not enjoy myself?" thouht Natasha,
azin at Helene with wide-open, wonderin eyes.

Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, havin
evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still too
aitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In
answer to the count's inquiries she replied that thins were all riht
and that she would tell about it next day. On hearin of Countess
Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evenin, Marya Dmitrievna
remarked:

"I don't care to have anythin to do with Bezukhova and don't advise you
to; however, if you've promised--o. It will divert your thouhts," she
added, addressin Natasha.




CHAPTER XIII

Count Rostov took the irls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a ood
many people there, but nearly all straners to Natasha. Count Rostov was
displeased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men and
women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle eore was
standin in a corner of the drawin room surrounded by youn men. There
were several Frenchmen present, amon them Metivier who from the time
Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The count
decided not to sit down to cards or let his irls out of his siht and
to et away as soon as Mademoiselle eore's performance was over.

Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.
Immediately after reetin the count he went up to Natasha and followed
her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feelin she had
had at the opera--ratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear at
the absence of a moral barrier between them.

Helene welcomed Natasha delihtedly and was loud in admiration of her
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle eore went
out of the room to chane her costume. In the drawin room people bean
arranin the chairs and takin their seats. Anatole moved a chair for
Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who never
lost siht of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.

Mademoiselle eore, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl
draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and
assumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whisperin was audible.

Mademoiselle eore looked sternly and loomily at the audience and
bean recitin some French verses describin her uilty love for her
son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,
liftin her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse
sounds, rollin her eyes.

"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.

Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor
understood anythin of what went on before her. She only felt herself
aain completely borne away into this strane senseless world--so remote
from her old world--a world in which it was impossible to know what was
ood or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole, and
conscious of his proximity she experienced a frihtened sense of
expectancy.

After the first monoloue the whole company rose and surrounded
Mademoiselle eore, expressin their enthusiasm.

"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had also
risen and was movin throuh the crowd toward the actress.

"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, followin Natasha.
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You are
enchantin... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased..."

"Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for his
dauhter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without sayin anythin
stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquirin
eyes.

After ivin several recitations, Mademoiselle eore left, and Countess
Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.

The count wished to o home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil her
improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Natasha for a
valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she
was bewitchin and that he loved her. Durin the ecossaise, which she
also danced with him, Anatole said nothin when they happened to be by
themselves, but merely azed at her. Natasha lifted her frihtened eyes
to him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look
and smile that she could not, whilst lookin at him, say what she had to
say. She lowered her eyes.

"Don't say such thins to me. I am betrothed and love another," she said
rapidly.... She lanced at him.

Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.

"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I am
madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are
enchantin?... It's our turn to bein."

Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-open
frihtened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly
anythin that went on that evenin. They danced the ecossaise and the
rossvater. Her father asked her to come home, but she beed to remain.
Wherever she went and whomever she was speakin to, she felt his eyes
upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her
o to the dressin room to rearrane her dress, that Helene had followed
her and spoken lauhinly of her brother's love, and that she aain met
Anatole in the little sittin room. Helene had disappeared leavin them
alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice:

"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see
you? I love you madly. Can I never...?" and, blockin her path, he
brouht his face close to hers.

His lare, litterin, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw
nothin but them.

"Natalie?" he whispered inquirinly while she felt her hands bein
painfully pressed. "Natalie?"

"I don't understand. I have nothin to say," her eyes replied.

Burnin lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt
herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress
were heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red and
tremblin, threw a frihtened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved
toward the door.

"One word, just one, for od's sake!" cried Anatole.

She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what
had happened and to which she could find no answer.

"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeatin, evidently not
knowin what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.

Helene returned with Natasha to the drawin room. The Rostovs went away
without stayin for supper.

After reachin home Natasha did not sleep all niht. She was tormented
by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.
She loved Prince Andrew--she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved
him. But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. "Else how
could all this have happened?" thouht she. "If, after that, I could
return his smile when sayin ood-by, if I was able to let it come to
that, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he is
kind, noble, and splendid, and I could not help lovin him. What am I to
do if I love him and the other one too?" she asked herself, unable to
find an answer to these terrible questions.




CHAPTER XIV

Mornin came with its cares and bustle. Everyone ot up and bean to
move about and talk, dressmakers came aain. Marya Dmitrievna appeared,
and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept lookin uneasily at
everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishin to intercept every lance
directed toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.

After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down in
her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her.

"Well, friends, I have now thouht the whole matter over and this is my
advice," she bean. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince
Bolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to
bein shoutin, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I had
to say!"

"Well, and he?" asked the count.

"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use of
talkin? As it is we have worn the poor irl out," said Marya
Dmitrievna. "My advice to you is finish your business and o back home
to Otradnoe... and wait there."

"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.

"Yes, o back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If your
betrothed comes here now--there will be no avoidin a quarrel; but alone
with the old man he will talk thins over and then come on to you."

Count Rostov approved of this suestion, appreciatin its
reasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better to
visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the weddin,
aainst his wishes, could only be arraned at Otradnoe.

"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her,"
said the old count.

"No, why be sorry? Bein here, you had to pay your respects. But if he
won't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, lookin for somethin
in her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothin
to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after you. Thouh I don't
like lettin you o, it is the best way. So o, with od's blessin!"

Havin found what she was lookin for in the reticule she handed it to
Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.

"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thin! She's
afraid you miht think that she does not like you."

"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.

"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.

"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha
boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and anry
resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently and
to frown.

"Don't answer like that, my ood irl!" she said. "What I say is true!
Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room to read
Princess Mary's letter.

Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstandin that
had occurred between them. Whatever her father's feelins miht be, she
beed Natasha to believe that she could not help lovin her as the one
chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice
everythin.

"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposed
toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be foriven; but he
is ood and mananimous and will love her who makes his son happy."
Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see
her aain.

After readin the letter Natasha sat down at the writin table to answer
it. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, and
then paused. What more could she write after all that had happened the
evenin before? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and now all is
chaned," she thouht as she sat with the letter she had beun before
her. "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful..." and to
escape from these dreadful thouhts she went to Sonya and bean sortin
patterns with her.

After dinner Natasha went to her room and aain took up Princess Mary's
letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thouht. "Can it be that
all this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went
before?" She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its former
strenth, and at the same time felt that she loved Kurain. She vividly
pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happiness
with him she had so often repeated in her imaination, and at the same
time, alow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's
interview with Anatole.

"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in complete
bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I have to
choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thouht,
"to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are both
equally impossible. But with that one nothin is spoiled. But am I
really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which I
have lived so lon?"

"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid enterin the room with a mysterious
air. "A man told me to ive you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter.

"Only, for Christ's sake..." the irl went on, as Natasha, without
thinkin, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter from
Anatole, of which, without takin in a word, she understood only that it
was a letter from him--from the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, or
else how could that have happened which had happened? And how could she
have a love letter from him in her hand?

With tremblin hands Natasha held that passionate love letter which
Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it an
echo of all that she herself imained she was feelin.

"Since yesterday evenin my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you or
to die. There is no other way for me," the letter bean. Then he went on
to say that he knew her parents would not ive her to him--for this
there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that if she
loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power could
hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away and
carry her off to the ends of the earth.

"Yes, yes! I love him!" thouht Natasha, readin the letter for the
twentieth time and findin some peculiarly deep meanin in each word of
it.

That evenin Marya Dmitrievna was oin to the Akharovs' and proposed to
take the irls with her. Natasha, pleadin a headache, remained at home.




CHAPTER XV

On returnin late in the evenin Sonya went to Natasha's room, and to
her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on the
table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.

As she read she lanced at the sleepin Natasha, tryin to find in her
face an explanation of what she was readin, but did not find it. Her
face was calm, entle, and happy. Clutchin her breast to keep herself
from chokin, Sonya, pale and tremblin with fear and aitation, sat
down in an armchair and burst into tears.

"How was it I noticed nothin? How could it o so far? Can she have left
off lovin Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kurain o to such
lenths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What will
Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is the
meanin of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day before
yesterday, yesterday, and today," thouht Sonya. "But it can't be that
she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowin who it was
from. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such a thin!"

Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, aain scannin her
face.

"Natasha!" she said, just audibly.

Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.

"Ah, you're back?"

And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment of
awakenin, she embraced her friend, but noticin Sonya's look of
embarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.

"Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.

"Yes," answered Sonya softly.

Natasha smiled rapturously.

"No, Sonya, I can't any loner!" she said. "I can't hide it from you any
loner. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darlin, he writes...
Sonya..."

Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.

"And Bolkonski?" she asked.

"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don't
know what love is...."

"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"

Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not rasp
the question.

"Well, then, are you refusin Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.

"Oh, you don't understand anythin! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!"
said Natasha, with momentary vexation.

"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How is it
you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you have only
seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're jokin! In
three days to foret everythin and so..."

"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundred
years. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can't
understand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced and
kissed her.

"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it too,
but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the same as before. As
soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that I
could not help lovin him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall
do. You don't understand that. What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?"
cried Natasha with a happy yet frihtened expression.

"But think what you are doin," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it like
this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him o so far?"
she went on, with a horror and disust she could hardly conceal.

"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you
understand? I love him!"

"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,
burstin into tears.

"What do you mean? For od's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"
declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to be
separated...."

When she saw Natasha's friht, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for
her friend.

"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to
you? Why doesn't he come to the house?"

Natasha did not answer her questions.

"For od's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natasha
entreated. "Remember no one ouht to interfere in such matters! I have
confided in you...."

"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya.
"Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew ave
you complete freedom--if it is really so; but I don't believe it!
Natasha, have you considered what these secret reasons can be?"

Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this question
presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how
to answer it.

"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"

Sonya sihed and shook her head incredulously.

"If there were reasons..." she bean.

But Natasha, uessin her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.

"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you
understand?" she cried.

"Does he love you?"

"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend's
lack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seen
him."

"But if he is dishonorable?"

"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.

"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or
cease seein you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him,
and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.

"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.

"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you sayin! Think of your
father and of Nicholas."

"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you say he
is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "o
away, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but o, for od's sake
o! You see how I am sufferin!" Natasha cried anrily, in a voice of
despair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the
room.

Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote that
answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all the
mornin. In this letter she said briefly that all their
misunderstandins were at an end; that availin herself of the
mananimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had iven her her
freedom, she beed Princess Mary to foret everythin and forive her
if she had been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife.
At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.

On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on Wednesday
the count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.

On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a bi
dinner party at the Karains', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. At
that party Natasha aain met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke
to him, tryin not to be overheard, and that all throuh dinner she was
more aitated than ever. When they ot home Natasha was the first to
bein the explanation Sonya expected.

"There, Sonya, you were talkin all sorts of nonsense about him,"
Natasha bean in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be
praised. "We have had an explanation today."

"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how lad I am you're not
anry with me! Tell me everythin--the whole truth. What did he say?"

Natasha became thouhtful.

"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I had
promised Bolkonski. He was lad I was free to refuse him."

Sonya sihed sorrowfully.

"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.

"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why do
you think so badly of me?"

"I don't think anythin, only I don't understand this..."

"Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everythin. You'll see what a man
he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think badly of
anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"

Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her. The
more emotional and inratiatin the expression of Natasha's face became,
the more serious and stern rew Sonya's.

"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven't
spoken, but now you yourself have beun. I don't trust him, Natasha. Why
this secrecy?"

"Aain, aain!" interrupted Natasha.

"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"

"Afraid of what?"

"I am afraid you're oin to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and was
herself horrified at what she had said.

Aner aain showed in Natasha's face.

"And I'll o to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not your
business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me alone, leave
me alone! I hate you!"

"Natasha!" moaned Sonya, ahast.

"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out
of the room.

Natasha did not speak to Sonya aain and avoided her. With the same
expression of aitated surprise and uilt she went about the house,
takin up now one occupation, now another, and at once abandonin them.

Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let her out
of her siht.

The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat
by the drawin-room window all the mornin as if expectin somethin and
that she made a sin to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to be
Anatole.

Sonya bean watchin her friend still more attentively and noticed that
at dinner and all that evenin Natasha was in a strane and unnatural
state. She answered questions at random, bean sentences she did not
finish, and lauhed at everythin.

After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waitin to
let her pass. She let the irl o in, and then listenin at the door
learned that another letter had been delivered.

Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadful
plan for that evenin. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not let
her in.

"She will run away with him!" thouht Sonya. "She is capable of
anythin. There was somethin particularly pathetic and resolute in her
face today. She cried as she said ood-by to Uncle," Sonya remembered.
"Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what am I to do?"
thouht she, recallin all the sins that clearly indicated that Natasha
had some terrible intention. "The count is away. What am I to do? Write
to Kurain demandin an explanation? But what is there to oblie him to
reply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of some
misfortune?... But perhaps she really has already refused Bolkonski--she
sent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tell
Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible.
"Well, anyway," thouht Sonya as she stood in the dark passae, "now or
never I must prove that I remember the family's oodness to me and that
I love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nihts I'll not leave
this passae and will hold her back by force and will and not let the
family be disraced," thouht she.




CHAPTER XVI

Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie Rostova's
abduction had been arraned and the preparations made by Dolokhov a few
days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listenin at Natasha's
door, resolved to safeuard her, it was to have been put into execution.
Natasha had promised to come out to Kurain at the back porch at ten
that evenin. Kurain was to put her into a troyka he would have ready
and to drive her forty miles to the villae of Kamenka, where an
unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a marriae ceremony over
them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to wait which would take them to
the Warsaw hihroad, and from there they would hasten abroad with post
horses.

Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles he
had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed with
Dolokhov's help.

Two witnesses for the mock marriae--Khvostikov, a retired petty
official whom Dolokhov made use of in his amblin transactions, and
Makarin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded
affection for Kurain--were sittin at tea in Dolokhov's front room.

In his lare study, the walls of which were hun to the ceilin with
Persian rus, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a travelin cloak
and hih boots, at an open desk on which lay an abacus and some bundles of
paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro from
the room where the witnesses were sittin, throuh the study to the room
behind, where his French valet and others were packin the last of his
thins. Dolokhov was countin the money and notin somethin down.

"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."

"ive it to him, then," said Anatole.

"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will o throuh fire and water for
you for nothin. So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov,
showin him the memorandum. "Is that riht?"

"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listenin to Dolokhov
and lookin straiht before him with a smile that did not leave his
face.

Dolokhov baned down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an
ironic smile:

"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"

"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it's
the devil knows what!"

"No, really, ive it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speakin seriously. It's
no joke, this plot you've hatched."

"What, teasin aain? o to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, makin a
rimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left the
room.

Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendinly when Anatole had one
out.

"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not jokin, I'm talkin
sense. Come here, come here!"

Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, tryin to ive him his
attention and evidently submittin to him involuntarily.

"Now listen to me. I'm tellin you this for the last time. Why should I
joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arraned everythin for you? Who
found the priest and ot the passport? Who raised the money? I did it
all."

"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not rateful?" And Anatole
sihed and embraced Dolokhov.

"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is a
danerous business, and if you think about it--a stupid business. Well,
you'll carry her off--all riht! Will they let it stop at that? It will
come out that you're already married. Why, they'll have you in the
criminal court...."

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and aain made a rimace.
"Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the partiality dull-
witted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their own
reasonin, repeated the arument he had already put to Dolokhov a
hundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this
conclusion: if this marriae is invalid," he went on, crookin one
finer, "then I have nothin to answer for; but if it is valid, no
matter! Abroad no one will know anythin about it. Isn't that so? And
don't talk to me, don't, don't."

"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only et yourself into a mess!"

"o to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutchin his hair, left the room,
but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhov
with his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What? Feel how it
beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a foot,
my dear fellow! What a lance! A oddess!" he added in French. "What?"

Dolokhov with a cold smile and a leam in his handsome insolent eyes
looked at him--evidently wishin to et some more amusement out of him.

"Well and when the money's one, what then?"

"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thouht of
the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talk
nonsense!" He lanced at his watch. "It's time!"

Anatole went into the back room.

"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdlin!" he shouted to the servants.

Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to brin
somethin for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went into
the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sittin.

Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leanin on his elbow and smilin
pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.

"Come and eat somethin. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from the
other room.

"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuin to smile.

"Come! Balaa is here."

Anatole rose and went into the dinin room. Balaa was a famous troyka
driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had iven
them ood service with his troykas. More than once when Anatole's
reiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in the
evenin, brouht him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back aain
the next niht. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape when
pursued. More than once he had driven them throuh the town with ypsies
and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than once in their
service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets of
Moscow and had always been protected from the consequences by "my
entlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more than one horse in their
service. More than once they had beaten him, and more than once they had
made him drunk on champane and Madeira, which he loved; and he knew
more than one thin about each of them which would lon ao have sent an
ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaa into their ories and
made him drink and dance at the ypsies', and more than one thousand
rubles of their money had passed throuh his hands. In their service he
risked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their service
had lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy. But he
liked them; liked that mad drivin at twelve miles an hour, liked
upsettin a driver or runnin down a pedestrian, and flyin at full
allop throuh the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy
shouts behind him: "et on! et on!" when it was impossible to o any
faster. He liked ivin a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who,
more dead than alive, was already hurryin out of his way. "Real
entlemen!" he considered them.

Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaa too for his masterly drivin and
because he liked the thins they liked. With others Balaa barained,
charin twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drove
himself, enerally lettin his youn men do so. But with "his entlemen"
he always drove himself and never demanded anythin for his work. Only a
couple of times a year--when he knew from their valets that they had
money in hand--he would turn up of a mornin quite sober and with a deep
bow would ask them to help him. The entlemen always made him sit down.

"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he would
say. "I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to o to the
fair."

And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would ive him a thousand
or a couple of thousand rubles.

Balaa was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about twenty-
seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, litterin little
eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined cloth
coat over a sheepskin.

On enterin the room now he crossed himself, turnin toward the front
corner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holdin out a small, black
hand.

"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowin.

"How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"

"ood day, your excellency!" he said, aain holdin out his hand to
Anatole who had just come in.

"I say, Balaa," said Anatole, puttin his hands on the man's shoulders,
"do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horses
have you come with? Eh?"

"As your messener ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaa.

"Well, listen, Balaa! Drive all three to death but et me there in
three hours. Eh?"

"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaa with a wink.

"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole,
suddenly rollin his eyes.

"Why joke?" said the driver, lauhin. "As if I'd rude my entlemen
anythin! As fast as ever the horses can allop, so fast we'll o!"

"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."

"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.

"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."

"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a lare
lass of Madeira for him.

The driver's eyes sparkled at the siht of the wine. After refusin it
for manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk
handkerchief he took out of his cap.

"And when are we to start, your excellency?"

"Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind,
Balaa! You'll et there in time? Eh?"

"That depends on our luck in startin, else why shouldn't we be there in
time?" replied Balaa. "Didn't we et you to Tver in seven hours? I
think you remember that, your excellency?"

"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilinly
at the recollection and turnin to Makarin who azed rapturously at him
with wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breath
away, the rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleihs and
drove riht over two of them. Eh?"

"Those were horses!" Balaa continued the tale. "That time I'd harnessed
two youn side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turnin
to Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flew
forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands rew numb in the sharp
frost so that I threw down the reins--'Catch hold yourself, your
excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleih and
sprawled there. It wasn't a case of urin them on, there was no holdin
them in till we reached the place. The devils took us there in three
hours! Only the near one died of it."




CHAPTER XVII

Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearin a
fur coat irt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one
side and very becomin to his handsome face. Havin looked in a mirror,
and standin before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it,
he lifted a lass of wine.

"Well, ood-by, Theodore. Thank you for everythin and farewell!" said
Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a moment
"...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turnin to Makarin and the others.

Thouh they were all oin with him, Anatole evidently wished to make
somethin touchin and solemn out of this address to his comrades. He
spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwin out his chest slihtly swayed
one le.

"All take lasses; you too, Balaa. Well, comrades and friends of my
youth, we've had our flin and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when
shall we meet aain? I am oin abroad. We have had a ood time--now
farewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptyin his
lass flun it on the floor.

"To your health!" said Balaa who also emptied his lass, and wiped his
mouth with his handkerchief.

Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.

"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!

"Let's o. Let's o!" cried Anatole.

Balaa was about to leave the room.

"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.
That's the way."

They shut the door and all sat down.

"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, risin.

Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they all
went out into the vestibule.

"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Inatka! o to
Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard what
elopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'll rush
out more dead than alive just in the thins she is wearin; if you delay
at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in a
minute and must o back--but you wrap the fur cloak round her first
thin and carry her to the sleih."

The valet brouht a woman's fox-lined cloak.

"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted so
that his voice ran far throuh the rooms.

A handsome, slim, and pale-faced ypsy irl with litterin black eyes
and curly blue-black hair, wearin a red shawl, ran out with a sable
mantle on her arm.

"Here, I don't rude it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of her
master and yet reretful of her cloak.

Dolokhov, without answerin, took the cloak, threw it over Matrena, and
wrapped her up in it.

"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar
up round her head, leavin only a little of the face uncovered. "And
then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet the
ap left by the collar, throuh which Matrena's brilliant smile was
seen.

"Well, ood-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissin her. "Ah, my revels here
are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, ood-by! ood-bye, Matrena,
wish me luck!"

"Well, Prince, may od ive you reat luck!" said Matrena in her ypsy
accent.

Two troykas were standin before the porch and two youn drivers were
holdin the horses. Balaa took his seat in the front one and holdin
his elbows hih arraned the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhov
ot in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in
the other sleih.

"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaa.

"o!" he cried, twistin the reins round his hands, and the troyka tore
down the Nikitski Boulevard.

"Tproo! et out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shoutin of Balaa and
of the sturdy youn fellow seated on the box was all that could be
heard. On the Arbat Square the troyka cauht aainst a carriae;
somethin cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew alon the
Arbat Street.

After takin a turn alon the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaa bean to
rein in, and turnin back drew up at the crossin of the old Konyusheny
Street.

The youn fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole
and Dolokhov went alon the pavement. When they reached the ate
Dolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.

"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out directly,"
said she.

Dolokhov stayed by the ate. Anatole followed the maid into the
courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.

He was met by abriel, Marya Dmitrievna's iantic footman.

"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,
interceptin any retreat.

"To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.

"Kindly step in, my orders are to brin you in."

"Kurain! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"

Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket ate and was
strulin with the yard porter who was tryin to lock it. With a last
desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran
back seized him by the arm, pulled him throuh the wicket, and ran back
with him to the troyka.




CHAPTER XVIII

Marya Dmitrievna, havin found Sonya weepin in the corridor, made her
confess everythin, and interceptin the note to Natasha she read it and
went into Natasha's room with it in her hand.

"You shameless ood-for-nothin!" said she. "I won't hear a word."

Pushin back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearless
eyes, she locked her in; and havin iven orders to the yard porter to
admit the persons who would be comin that evenin, but not to let them
out aain, and havin told the footman to brin them up to her, she
seated herself in the drawin room to await the abductors.

When abriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run away
aain, she rose frownin, and claspin her hands behind her paced
throuh the rooms a lon time considerin what she should do. Toward
midniht she went to Natasha's room finerin the key in her pocket.
Sonya was sittin sobbin in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for od's
sake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked the
door and went in without ivin her an answer.... "Disustin,
abominable... In my house... horrid irl, hussy! I'm only sorry for her
father!" thouht she, tryin to restrain her wrath. "Hard as it may be,
I'll tell them all to hold their tonues and will hide it from the
count." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha lyin on the
sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was in
just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.

"A nice irl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranin meetins
with lovers in my house! It's no use pretendin: you listen when I speak
to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when I speak!
You've disraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'd treat you
differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal it."

Natasha did not chane her position, but her whole body heaved with
noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna lanced
round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.

"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said in
her rouh voice. "Do you hear what I am sayin or not?" she added.

She put her lare hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her.
Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha
looked. Her eyes were dry and listenin, her lips compressed, her
cheeks sunken.

"Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered,
wrenchin herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort
and sinkin down aain into her former position.

"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your ood. Lie still, stay
like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you how
uilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes back
tomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"

Aain Natasha's body shook with sobs.

"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"

"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.

"That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. "If they hear of
this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if he
challenes him to a duel will that be all riht? Eh?"

"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked you
to?" shouted Natasha, raisin herself on the sofa and lookin
malinantly at Marya Dmitrievna.

"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, rowin anry aain.
"Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his comin to the house?
Why carry you off as if you were some ypsy sinin irl?... Well, if he
had carried you off... do you think they wouldn't have found him? Your
father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a wretch--
that's a fact!"

"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha ettin up. "If you
hadn't interfered... Oh, my od! What is it all? What is it? Sonya,
why?... o away!"

And she burst into sobs with the despairin vehemence with which people
bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Marya
Dmitrievna was to speak aain but Natasha cried out:

"o away! o away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herself
back on the sofa.

Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishin her for some time, enjoinin on her
that it must all be kept from her father and assurin her that nobody
would know anythin about it if only Natasha herself would undertake to
foret it all and not let anyone see that somethin had happened.
Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any loner, but she rew cold and
had a shiverin fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head,
covered her with two quilts, and herself brouht her some lime-flower
water, but Natasha did not respond to her.

"Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went out of the room
supposin Natasha to be asleep.

But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes she
looked straiht before her. All that niht she did not sleep or weep and
did not speak to Sonya who ot up and went to her several times.

Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time for
lunch as he had promised. He was in very ood spirits; the affair with
the purchaser was oin on satisfactorily, and there was nothin to keep
him any loner in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Marya
Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the
day before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she was
better now. Natasha had not left her room that mornin. With compressed
and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasily
watchin the people who drove past and hurriedly lancin round at
anyone who entered the room. She was evidently expectin news of him and
that he would come or would write to her.

When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the sound
of a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolent
expression. She did not even et up to reet him. "What is the matter
with you, my anel? Are you ill?" asked the count.

After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."

In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejected
and whether anythin had happened to her betrothed, she assured him that
nothin had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievna
confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothin had happened. From the
pretense of illness, from his dauhter's distress, and by the
embarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly
that somethin had one wron durin his absence, but it was so terrible
for him to think that anythin disraceful had happened to his beloved
dauhter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that he
avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothin particularly
had happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition
delayed their return to the country.




CHAPTER XIX

From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intendin to o
away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovs came to
Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out his
intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who had
lon since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased
husband's.

When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya
Dmitrievna askin him to come and see her on a matter of reat
importance relatin to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierre had
been avoidin Natasha because it seemed to him that his feelin for her
was stroner than a married man's should be for his friend's fiancee.
Yet some fate constantly threw them toether.

"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thouht he as
he dressed to o to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrew would
hurry up and come and marry her!" thouht he on his way to the house.

On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.

"Pierre! Been back lon?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In a
sleih drawn by two ray trottin-horses that were bespatterin the
dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed
past. Anatole was sittin upriht in the classic pose of military
dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and his
head slihtly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat,
tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkled
with powdery snow.

"Yes, indeed, that's a true sae," thouht Pierre. "He sees nothin
beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothin troubles him and so he is
always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I ive to be like
him!" he thouht enviously.

In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off with his
fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.

When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sittin at the
window, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She lanced round at him,
frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dinity.

"What has happened?" asked Pierre, enterin Marya Dmitrievna's room.

"Fine doins!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eiht years have I lived
in this world and never known anythin so disraceful!"

And havin put him on his honor not to repeat anythin she told him,
Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew
without her parents' knowlede and that the cause of this was Anatole
Kurain into whose society Pierre's wife had thrown her and with whom
Natasha had tried to elope durin her father's absence, in order to be
married secretly.

Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was told
him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's deeply
loved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who used to be so
charmin--should ive up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
to aree to run away with him, was somethin Pierre could not conceive
and could not imaine.

He could not reconcile the charmin impression he had of Natasha, whom
he had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness,
folly, and cruelty. He thouht of his wife. "They are all alike!" he
said to himself, reflectin that he was not the only man unfortunate
enouh to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew to
the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the more
he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
disust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with
such a look of cold dinity. He did not know that Natasha's soul was
overflowin with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not
her fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dinity
and severity.

"But how et married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "He
could not marry--he is married!"

"Thins et worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "A
nice youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expectin him--expectin him
since yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't o on
expectin him."

After hearin the details of Anatole's marriae from Pierre, and ivin
vent to her aner aainst Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna
told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count or
Bolkonski, who miht arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair
(which she hoped to hide from them) miht challene Anatole to a duel,
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
leave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him aain. Pierre--only
now realizin the daner to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince Andrew--
promised to do as she wished. Havin briefly and exactly explained her
wishes to him, she let him o to the drawin room.

"Mind, the count knows nothin. Behave as if you know nothin either,"
she said. "And I will o and tell her it is no use expectin him! And
stay to dinner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.

Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That mornin
Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.

"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troubles
one has with these irls without their mother! I do so reret havin
come here.... I will be frank with you. Have you heard she has broken
off her enaement without consultin anybody? It's true this enaement
never was much to my likin. Of course he is an excellent man, but
still, with his father's disapproval they wouldn't have been happy, and
Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been oin on so lon, and to
take such a step without father's or mother's consent! And now she's
ill, and od knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manae dauhters in
their mother's absence...."

Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to chane the
subject, but the count returned to his troubles.

Sonya entered the room with an aitated face.

"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to see you.
Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."

"Yes, you are a reat friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send
him a messae," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all
was!"

And clutchin the spare ray locks on his temples the count left the
room.

When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha did
not wish to believe it and insisted on havin it confirmed by Pierre
himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him alon the corridor to
Natasha's room.

Natasha, pale and stern, was sittin beside Marya Dmitrievna, and her
eyes, litterin feverishly, met Pierre with a questionin look the
moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only azed fixedly at
him, and her look asked only one thin: was he a friend, or like the
others an enemy in reard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did
not exist for her.

"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointin to Pierre and
addressin Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."

Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal
looks at the approachin dos and sportsmen.

"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre bean, droppin his eyes with a feelin of
pity for her and loathin for the thin he had to do, "whether it is
true or not should make no difference to you, because..."

"Then it is not true that he's married!"

"Yes, it is true."

"Has he been married lon?" she asked. "On your honor?..."

Pierre ave his word of honor.

"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.

"Yes, I have just seen him."

She was evidently unable to speak and made a sin with her hands that
they should leave her alone.




CHAPTER XX

Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once.
He drove throuh the town seekin Anatole Kurain, at the thouht of
whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in
breathin. He was not at the ice hills, nor at the ypsies', nor at
Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the club. In the club all was oin on as
usual. The members who were assemblin for dinner were sittin about in
roups; they reeted Pierre and spoke of the town news. The footman
havin reeted him, knowin his habits and his acquaintances, told him
there was a place left for him in the small dinin room and that Prince
Michael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yet
arrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were talkin about
the weather, asked if he had heard of Kurain's abduction of Rostova
which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre lauhed and
said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked
everyone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and
another that he was comin to dinner. Pierre felt it strane to see this
calm, indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was oin on in his
soul. He paced throuh the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, and
as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.

Anatole, for whom Pierre was lookin, dined that day with Dolokhov,
consultin him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed to
him essential to see Natasha. In the evenin he drove to his sister's to
discuss with her how to arrane a meetin. When Pierre returned home
after vainly huntin all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince
Anatole was with the countess. The countess' drawin room was full of
uests.

Pierre without reetin his wife whom he had not seen since his return--
at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever--entered the
drawin room and seein Anatole went up to him.

"Ah, Pierre," said the countess oin up to her husband. "You don't know
what a pliht our Anatole..."

She stopped, seein in the forward thrust of her husband's head, in his
lowin eyes and his resolute ait, the terrible indications of that
rae and strenth which she knew and had herself experienced after his
duel with Dolokhov.

"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife.
"Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.

Anatole lanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to
follow Pierre. Pierre, takin him by the arm, pulled him toward himself
and was leadin him from the room.

"If you allow yourself in my drawin room..." whispered Helene, but
Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.

Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
anxiety.

Havin entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole
without lookin at him.

"You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with
her, is that so?"

"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French),
"I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that
tone."

Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatole
by the collar of his uniform with his bi hand and shook him from side
to side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient deree of terror.

"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.

"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, finerin a button of
his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.

"You're a scoundrel and a blackuard, and I don't know what deprives me
from the pleasure of smashin your head with this!" said Pierre,
expressin himself so artificially because he was talkin French.

He took a heavy paperweiht and lifted it threateninly, but at once put
it back in its place.

"Did you promise to marry her?"

"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."

Pierre interrupted him.

"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, movin toward
Anatole.

Anatole lanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket
and drew out his pocketbook.

Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushin aside a table
that stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.

"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to a
frihtened esture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as if
repeatin a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a short
pause, aain risin and aain pacin the room, "tomorrow you must et
out of Moscow."

"But how can I?..."

"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listenin to him, "you must never
breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova. I
know I can't prevent your doin so, but if you have a spark of
conscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.

Anatole sat at a table frownin and bitin his lips.

"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such
a thin as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruinin
a whole life for the sake of amusin yourself! Amuse yourself with women
like my wife--with them you are within your rihts, for they know what
you want of them. They are armed aainst you by the same experience of
debauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, to
kidnap.... Don't you understand that it is as mean as beatin an old man
or a child?..."

Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no loner with an anry but with a
questionin look.

"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, rowin more confident as
Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," he
said, not lookin at Pierre and with a sliht tremor of his lower jaw,
"but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so on--which as a man of
honor I can't allow anyone to use."

Pierre lanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what he
wanted.

"Thouh it was tête-à-tête," Anatole continued, "still I can't..."

"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.

"You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as
you wish, eh?"

"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to
forive me." Pierre involuntarily lanced at the loose button. "And if
you require money for your journey..."

Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and crinin smile, which
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.

"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.

Next day Anatole left for Petersbur.




CHAPTER XXI

Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of her
wish that Kurain should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was in
a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, havin, as Marya
Dmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the niht after she had
been told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily
procured. After swallowin a little she had been so frihtened that she
woke Sonya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes had
been administered in time and she was now out of daner, thouh still so
weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country, and so
the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, and
Sonya, who had a tear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.

Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides ossip about
the attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these rumors,
assurin everyone that nothin had happened except that his brother-in-
law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to Pierre that it
was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish Natasha's
reputation.

He was awaitin Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every day to
the old prince's for news of him.

Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from
Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which
Natasha had broken off her enaement. He seemed in better spirits than
usual and awaited his son with reat impatience.

Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from Prince
Andrew, informin him of his arrival and askin him to come to see him.

As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his father
Natasha's note to Princess Mary breakin off her enaement
(Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and iven it
to the old prince), and he heard from him the story of Natasha's
elopement, with additions.

Prince Andrew had arrived in the evenin and Pierre came to see him next
mornin. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state
as Natasha and was therefore surprised on enterin the drawin room to
hear him in the study talkin in a loud animated voice about some
intriue oin on in Petersbur. The old prince's voice and another now
and then interrupted him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She
sihed, lookin toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,
evidently intendin to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierre
saw by her face that she was lad both at what had happened and at the
way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness.

"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not let
him express his feelins, but still he has taken it better, far better,
than I expected. Evidently it had to be...."

"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.

Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand
how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince
Andrew, reatly chaned and plainly in better health, but with a fresh
horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facin his
father and Prince Meshcherski, warmly disputin and viorously
esticulatin. The conversation was about Speranski--the news of whose
sudden exile and alleed treachery had just reached Moscow.

"Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a
month ao," Prince Andrew was sayin, "and by those who were unable to
understand his aims. To jude a man who is in disfavor and to throw on
him all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintain
that if anythin ood has been accomplished in this rein it was done by
him, by him alone."

He paused at the siht of Pierre. His face quivered and immediately
assumed a vindictive expression.

"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned to
Pierre.

"Well, how are you? Still ettin stouter?" he said with animation, but
the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said in
answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.

To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now of
no use to anyone."

After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish
frontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, and
about M. Dessalles, whom he had brouht from abroad to be his son's
tutor, Prince Andrew aain joined warmly in the conversation about
Speranski which was still oin on between the two old men.

"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I do
not, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"

Pierre now reconized in his friend a need with which he was only too
familiar, to et excited and to have aruments about extraneous matters
in order to stifle thouhts that were too oppressive and too intimate.
When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and
asked him into the room that had been assined him. A bed had been made
up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. Prince
Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew a
packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. He
stood up and couhed. His face was loomy and his lips compressed.

"Forive me for troublin you..."

Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was oin to speak of Natasha, and his
broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince
Andrew, and in a determined, rinin, and unpleasant tone he continued:

"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports
of your brother-in-law havin souht her hand, or somethin of that
kind. Is that true?"

"Both true and untrue," Pierre bean; but Prince Andrew interrupted him.

"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.

He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.

"ive this to the countess... if you see her."

"She is very ill," said Pierre.

"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kurain?" he
added quickly.

"He left lon ao. She has been at death's door."

"I much reret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like his
father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.

"So Monsieur Kurain has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand?"
said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.

"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.

Prince Andrew lauhed disareeably, aain remindin one of his father.

"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.

"He has one to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.

"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostova
that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is
ood."

Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if tryin to remember whether
he had somethin more to say, or waitin to see if Pierre would say
anythin, looked fixedly at him.

"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersbur?" asked Pierre,
"about..."

"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen woman
should be foriven, but I didn't say I could forive her. I can't."

"But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.

Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her hand
aain, be mananimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but
I am unable to follow in that entleman's footsteps. If you wish to be
my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well, ood-by. So
you'll ive her the packet?"

Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.

The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as
always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed her
satisfaction that the enaement had been broken off. Lookin at them
Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for the
Rostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mention
the name of her who could ive up Prince Andrew for anyone else.

At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becomin
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, aruin now with his father,
now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showin an unnatural animation,
the cause of which Pierre so well understood.




CHAPTER XXII

That same evenin Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commission
entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the club, and Pierre,
after ivin the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was
interested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes
later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.

"Natasha insists on seein Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.

"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been
tidied up."

"No, she has dressed and one into the drawin room," said Sonya.

Marya Dmitrievna only shrued her shoulders.

"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don't
tell her everythin!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't the heart to scold
her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."

Natasha was standin in the middle of the drawin room, emaciated, with
a pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find
her. When he appeared at the door she rew flurried, evidently undecided
whether to o to meet him or to wait till he came up.

Pierre hastened to her. He thouht she would ive him her hand as usual;
but she, steppin up to him, stopped, breathin heavily, her arms
hanin lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she went
to the middle of the ballroom to sin, but with quite a different
expression of face.

"Peter Kirilovich," she bean rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your
friend--is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her that
everythin that had once been must now be different.) "He told me once
to apply to you..."

Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had
reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt so
sorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.

"He is here now: tell him... to for... forive me!" She stopped and
breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.

"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."

He did not know what to say.

Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thouht of what he miht think she
had meant.

"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be.
I'm only tormented by the wron I have done him. Tell him only that I
be him to forive, forive, forive me for everythin...."

She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.

A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.

"I will tell him, I will tell him everythin once more," said Pierre.
"But... I should like to know one thin...."

"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.

"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how to
refer to Anatole and flushed at the thouht of him--"did you love that
bad man?"

"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know at
all...."

She bean to cry and a still reater sense of pity, tenderness, and love
welled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles and
hoped they would not be noticed.

"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his entle,
cordial tone suddenly seemed very strane to Natasha.

"We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everythin; but one thin
I be of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or
simply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when your mind is
clearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happy
if it's in my power..."

Pierre rew confused.

"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed Natasha and
turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.

He knew he had somethin more to say to her. But when he said it he was
amazed at his own words.

"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.


"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and self-
abasement.

"All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,
cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this moment
ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"

For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of ratitude and
tenderness, and lancin at Pierre she went out of the room.

Pierre too when she had one almost ran into the anteroom, restrainin
tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without findin the
sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and ot into his sleih.

"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.

"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I o now? Surely not to the
club or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison
with this feelin of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparison
with that softened, rateful, last look she had iven him throuh her
tears.

"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two derees of frost Fahrenheit
he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled the
air with joy.

It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above the
black roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only lookin up at the sky
did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliatin were all mundane
thins compared with the heihts to which his soul had just been raised.
At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry
sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above the
Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars
but distinuished from them all by its nearness to the earth, its white
liht, and its lon uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliant
comet of 1812--the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes and
the end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with its lon
luminous tail aroused no feelin of fear. On the contrary he azed
joyfully, his eyes moist with tears, at this briht comet which, havin
traveled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity throuh immeasurable
space, seemed suddenly--like an arrow piercin the earth--to remain
fixed in a chosen spot, viorously holdin its tail erect, shinin and
displayin its white liht amid countless other scintillatin stars. It
seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passin in
his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossomin into a new life.

BOOK NINE: 1812




CHAPTER I

From the close of the year 1811 intensified armin and concentratin of
the forces of Western Europe bean, and in 1812 these forces--millions
of men, reckonin those transportin and feedin the army--moved from
the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811
Russian forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812,
the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war bean,
that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to human
nature. Millions of men perpetrated aainst one another such innumerable
crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, foreries, issues of false money,
burlaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are not
recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which
those who committed them did not at the time reard as bein crimes.

What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The
historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrons
inflicted on the Duke of Oldenbur, the nonobservance of the Continental
System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, the
mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.

Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,
Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evenin party, to have
taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon to
have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restore
the duchy to the Duke of Oldenbur"--and there would have been no war.

We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries. It
naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by Enland's
intriues (as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena). It naturally
seemed to members of the Enlish Parliament that the cause of the war
was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of Oldenbur, that the cause of the
war was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of the
war was the Continental System which was ruinin Europe; to the enerals
and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity of
ivin them employment; to the leitimists of that day that it was the
need of re-establishin les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of
that time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance between
Russia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed from
Napoleon, and from the awkward wordin of Memorandum No. 178. It is
natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other
reasons, the number dependin on the endless diversity of points of
view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, to
posterity who view the thin that happened in all its manitude and
perceive its plain and terrible meanin, these causes seem insufficient.
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and
tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander
was firm, or because Enland's policy was astute or the Duke of
Oldenbur wroned. We cannot rasp what connection such circumstances
have with the actual fact of slauhter and violence: why because the
Duke was wroned, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed
and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.

To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carried
away by the process of research and can therefore reard the event with
unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes present
themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
them we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears
to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insinificance
compared to the manitude of the events, and by its impotence--apart
from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes--to occasion the
event. To us, the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to
serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon's refusal to
withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of
Oldenbur; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,
and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would have
been so many less men in Napoleon's army and the war could not have
occurred.

Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw
beyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there would
have been no war; but had all his sereants objected to servin a second
term then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been a
war had there been no Enlish intriues and no Duke of Oldenbur, and
had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic
overnment in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent
dictatorship and Empire, or all the thins that produced the French
Revolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothin could have
happened. So all these causes--myriads of causes--coincided to brin it
about. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence, but it had to
occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncin their human
feelins and reason, had to o from west to east to slay their fellows,
just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east
to the west, slayin their fellows.

The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemed
to han, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was
drawn into the campain by lot or by conscription. This could not be
otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whom
the event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence of
innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event
could not have taken place. It was necessary that millions of men in
whose hands lay the real power--the soldiers who fired, or transported
provisions and uns--should consent to carry out the will of these weak
individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number
of diverse and complex causes.

We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational
events (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do not
understand). The more we try to explain such events in history
reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to
us.

Each man lives for himself, usin his freedom to attain his personal
aims, and feels with his whole bein that he can now do or abstain from
doin this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that action
performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belons to
history, in which it has not a free but a predestined sinificance.

There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which
is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive
life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.

Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument in
the attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed done
is irrevocable, and its result coincidin in time with the actions of
millions of other men assumes an historic sinificance. The hiher a man
stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with and
the more power he has over others, the more evident is the
predestination and inevitability of his every action.

"The kin's heart is in the hands of the Lord."

A kin is history's slave.

History, that is, the unconscious, eneral, hive life of mankind, uses
every moment of the life of kins as a tool for its own purposes.

Thouh Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le san de ses peuples *--
as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him--he had never
been so much in the rip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while
thinkin that he was actin on his own volition, to perform for the hive
life--that is to say, for history--whatever had to be performed.


* "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."

The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and by
the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and co-
ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for the
nonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenbur's wrons,
the movement of troops into Prussia--undertaken (as it seemed to
Napoleon) only for the purpose of securin an armed peace, the French
Emperor's love and habit of war coincidin with his people's
inclinations, allurement by the randeur of the preparations, and the
expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtainin advantaes
to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicatin honors he received
in Dresden, the diplomatic neotiations which, in the opinion of
contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,
but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions of
other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happenin or
coincided with it.

When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its
attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried
by the sun, because it rows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or
because the boy standin below wants to eat it?

Nothin is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions in
which all vital oranic and elemental events occur. And the botanist who
finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so
forth is equally riht with the child who stands under the tree and says
the apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equally
riht or wron is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because he
wanted to, and perished because Alexander desired his destruction, and
he who says that an undermined hill weihin a million tons fell because
the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. In historic
events the so-called reat men are labels ivin names to events, and
like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.

Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is
in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of
history and predestined from eternity.




CHAPTER II

On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spent
three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kins,
and even an emperor. Before leavin, Napoleon showed favor to the
emperor, kins, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kins
and princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds
of his own--that is, which he had taken from other kins--to the Empress
of Austria, and havin, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced the
Empress Marie Louise--who rearded him as her husband, thouh he had
left another wife in Paris--left her rieved by the partin which she
seemed hardly able to bear. Thouh the diplomatists still firmly
believed in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end,
and thouh the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander,
callin him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that he did
not want war and would always love and honor him--yet he set off to join
his army, and at every station ave fresh orders to accelerate the
movement of his troops from west to east. He went in a travelin coach
with six horses, surrounded by paes, aides-de-camp, and an escort,
alon the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzi, and Konisber. At each of these
towns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.

The army was movin from west to east, and relays of six horses carried
him in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * comin up with the
army, he spent the niht in apartments prepared for him on the estate of
a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.


* Old style.

Next day, overtakin the army, he went in a carriae to the Niemen, and,
chanin into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to
select a place for the crossin.

Seein, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the wide-
spreadin steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow
(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythia
into which Alexander the reat had marched--Napoleon unexpectedly, and
contrary alike to strateic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an
advance, and the next day his army bean to cross the Niemen.

Early in the mornin of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,
which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and
looked throuh a spylass at the streams of his troops pourin out of
the Vilkavisski forest and flowin over the three brides thrown across
the river. The troops, knowin of the Emperor's presence, were on the
lookout for him, and when they cauht siht of a fiure in an overcoat
and a cocked hat standin apart from his suite in front of his tent on
the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive l'Empereur!" and
one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast forest
that had concealed them and, separatin, flowed on and on by the three
brides to the other side.

"Now we'll o into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, thins
et hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So these are
the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,
Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. ood
luck!... Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!... preur!--If they
make me overnor of India, erard, I'll make you Minister of Kashmir--
that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The Cossacks--
those rascals--see how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he is, do you
see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now. The little corporal... I
saw him ive the cross to one of the veterans.... Vive l'Empereur!" came
the voices of men, old and youn, of most diverse characters and social
positions. On the faces of all was one common expression of joy at the
commencement of the lon-expected campain and of rapture and devotion
to the man in the ray coat who was standin on the hill.

On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thorouhbred Arab horse was
brouht to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a allop to one of the
brides over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous
acclamations which he evidently endured only because it was impossible
to forbid the soldiers to express their love of him by such shoutin,
but the shoutin which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him and
distracted him from the military cares that had occupied him from the
time he joined the army. He rode across one of the swayin pontoon
brides to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and alloped in
the direction of Kovno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the
uard who, breathless with deliht, alloped ahead to clear a path for
him throuh the troops. On reachin the broad river Viliya, he stopped
near a reiment of Polish uhlans stationed by the river.

"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breakin their ranks and
pressin aainst one another to see him.

Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a lo
that lay on the bank. At a mute sin from him, a telescope was handed
him which he rested on the back of a happy pae who had run up to him,
and he azed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laid
out on the los. Without liftin his head he said somethin, and two of
his aides-de-camp alloped off to the Polish uhlans.

"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish uhlans
when one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.

The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of the
Polish uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumblin in his speech
from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted to
swim the river with his uhlans instead of seekin a ford. In evident
fear of refusal, like a boy askin for permission to et on a horse, he
beed to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor's eyes.
The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not be
displeased at this excess of zeal.

As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer,
with happy face and sparklin eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!"
and, commandin the uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and alloped
into the river. He ave an anry thrust to his horse, which had rown
restive under him, and pluned into the water, headin for the deepest
part where the current was swift. Hundreds of uhlans alloped in after
him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the
stream, and the uhlans cauht hold of one another as they fell off their
horses. Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men; the others
tried to swim on, some in the saddle and some clinin to their horses'
manes. They tried to make their way forward to the opposite bank and,
thouh there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that they
were swimmin and drownin in this river under the eyes of the man who
sat on the lo and was not even lookin at what they were doin. When
the aide-de-camp, havin returned and choosin an opportune moment,
ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles to
his person, the little man in the ray overcoat ot up and, havin
summoned Berthier, bean pacin up and down the bank with him, ivin
him instructions and occasionally lancin disapprovinly at the
drownin uhlans who distracted his attention.

For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of the
world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enouh to
dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called for
his horse and rode to his quarters.

Some forty uhlans were drowned in the river, thouh boats were sent to
their assistance. The majority struled back to the bank from which
they had started. The colonel and some of his men ot across and with
difficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they had
ot out, in their soaked and streamin clothes, they shouted "Vivat!"
and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where he
no loner was and at that moment considered themselves happy.

That evenin, between issuin one order that the fored Russian paper
money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly as
possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a letter
containin information about the orders to the French army had been
found, Napoleon also ave instructions that the Polish colonel who had
needlessly pluned into the river should be enrolled in the Leion
d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.

Quos vult perdere dementat. *


* Those whom (od) wishes to destroy he drives mad.




CHAPTER III

The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than a
month, reviewin troops and holdin maneuvers. Nothin was ready for the
war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had come
from Petersbur. There was no eneral plan of action. The vacillation
between the various plans that were proposed had even increased after
the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the three
armies had its own commander-in-chief, but there was no supreme
commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that
responsibility himself.

The loner the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody--tired
of waitin--prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded
the soverein seemed directed merely to makin him spend his time
pleasantly and foret that war was impendin.

In June, after many balls and fetes iven by the Polish manates, by the
courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish
aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be iven for
the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eaerly received. The
Emperor ave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected money by
subscription. The lady who was thouht to be most pleasin to the
Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennisen, bein a
landowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete,
and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, reatta, and
fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennisen's country seat.

The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and his
vanuard, drivin off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,
Alexander spent the evenin at the entertainment iven by his aides-de-
camp at Bennisen's country house.

It was a ay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declared
that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.
Countess Bezukhova was present amon other Russian ladies who had
followed the soverein from Petersbur to Vilna and eclipsed the refined
Polish ladies by her massive, so-called Russian type of beauty. The
Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.

Boris Drubetskoy, havin left his wife in Moscow and bein for the
present en arcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, thouh not an
aide-de-camp, had subscribed a lare sum toward the expenses. Boris was
now a rich man who had risen to hih honors and no loner souht
patronae but stood on an equal footin with the hihest of those of his
own ae. He was meetin Helene in Vilna after not havin seen her for a
lon time and did not recall the past, but as Helene was enjoyin the
favors of a very important personae and Boris had only recently
married, they met as ood friends of lon standin.

At midniht dancin was still oin on. Helene, not havin a suitable
partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They were the
third couple. Boris, coolly lookin at Helene's dazzlin bare shoulders
which emered from a dark, old-embroidered, auze own, talked to her
of old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himself and
unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor
who was in the same room. The Emperor was not dancin, he stood in the
doorway, stoppin now one pair and now another with racious words which
he alone knew how to utter.

As the mazurka bean, Boris saw that Adjutant eneral Balashev, one of
those in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary
to court etiquette stood near him while he was talkin to a Polish lady.
Havin finished speakin to her, the Emperor looked inquirinly at
Balashev and, evidently understandin that he only acted thus because
there were important reasons for so doin, nodded slihtly to the lady
and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev beun to speak before a look of
amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He took Balashev by the arm
and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearin a path seven yards
wide as the people on both sides made way for him. Boris noticed
Arakcheev's excited face when the soverein went out with Balashev.
Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffin with
his red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expectin the Emperor
to address him. (Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and was
displeased that evidently important news had reached the Emperor
otherwise than throuh himself.)

But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated arden
without noticin Arakcheev who, holdin his sword and lancin
wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.

All the time Boris was oin throuh the fiures of the mazurka, he was
worried by the question of what news Balashev had brouht and how he
could find it out before others. In the fiure in which he had to choose
two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose Countess
Potocka who, he thouht, had one out onto the veranda, and lided over
the parquet to the door openin into the arden, where, seein Balashev
and the Emperor returnin to the veranda, he stood still. They were
movin toward the door. Boris, flutterin as if he had not had time to
withdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.

The Emperor, with the aitation of one who has been personally
affronted, was finishin with these words:

"To enter Russia without declarin war! I will not make peace as lon as
a sinle armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it
ave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied with
the form in which he had expressed his thouhts, but displeased that
Boris had overheard it.

"Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.

Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closin his eyes,
slihtly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom and
remained there about another half-hour.

Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army had
crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certain
important personaes that much that was concealed from others was
usually known to him, and by this means he rose hiher in their
estimation.

The unexpected news of the French havin crossed the Niemen was
particularly startlin after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at
a ball. On first receivin the news, under the influence of indination
and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fully
expressed his feelins, and has since become famous. On returnin home
at two o'clock that niht he sent for his secretary, Shishkov, and told
him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field Marshal
Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words bein inserted that
he would not make peace so lon as a sinle armed Frenchman remained on
Russian soil.

Next day the followin letter was sent to Napoleon:

Monsieur mon frere,

Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept my
enaements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian
frontier, and I have this moment received from Petersbur a note, in
which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aression, that
Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with me
from the time Prince Kurain asked for his passports. The reasons on
which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him would
never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for
aression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, was
never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I was informed of
it I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remain
at his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of our
peoples for such a misunderstandin, and consents to withdraw your
troops from Russian territory, I will reard what has passed as not
havin occurred and an understandin between us will be possible. In the
contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an
attack that nothin on my part has provoked. It still depends on Your
Majesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war. I am,
etc.,

(sined) Alexander.




CHAPTER IV

At two in the mornin of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, havin
sent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to
take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatchin
Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not make
peace so lon as a sinle armed enemy remained on Russian soil and told
him to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert them
in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he felt
it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt at
reconciliation was bein made, but he definitely instructed Balashev to
repeat them personally to Napoleon.

Havin set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by a
buler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at the
villae of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he
was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.

A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and a
shay cap, shouted to the approachin Balashev to halt. Balashev did
not do so at once, but continued to advance alon the road at a walkin
pace.

The noncommissioned officer frowned and, mutterin words of abuse,
advanced his horse's chest aainst Balashev, put his hand to his saber,
and shouted rudely at the Russian eneral, askin: was he deaf that he
did not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. The
noncommissioned officer bean talkin with his comrades about reimental
matters without lookin at the Russian eneral.

After livin at the seat of the hihest authority and power, after
conversin with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in eneral
bein accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev
found it very strane here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile,
and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force to
himself.

The sun was only just appearin from behind the clouds, the air was
fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was bein driven alon the road from
the villae, and over the fields the larks rose trillin, one after
another, like bubbles risin in water.

Balashev looked around him, awaitin the arrival of an officer from the
villae. The Russian Cossacks and buler and the French hussars looked
silently at one another from time to time.

A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came
ridin from the villae on a handsome sleek ray horse, accompanied by
two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all looked
smart and well kept.

It was that first period of a campain when troops are still in full
trim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade of
martial swaer in their clothes, and a touch of the aiety and spirit
of enterprise which always accompany the openin of a campain.

The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and
evidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiers
and behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to
the Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor's
quarters were, he believed, not far off.

They rode throuh the villae of Rykonty, past tethered French hussar
horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with
curiosity at a Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of the
villae. The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mile
and a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to his
destination.

The sun had by now risen and shone aily on the briht verdure.

They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a roup
of horsemen comin toward them. In front of the roup, on a black horse
with trappins that littered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes in
his hat and black hair curlin down to his shoulders. He wore a red
mantle, and stretched his lon les forward in French fashion. This man
rode toward Balashev at a allop, his plumes flowin and his ems and
old lace litterin in the briht June sunshine.

Balashev was only two horses' lenth from the equestrian with the
bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and old embroidery, who was allopin
toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, the
French colonel, whispered respectfully: "The Kin of Naples!" It was, in
fact, Murat, now called "Kin of Naples." Thouh it was quite
incomprehensible why he should be Kin of Naples, he was called so, and
was himself convinced that he was so, and therefore assumed a more
solemn and important air than formerly. He was so sure that he really
was the Kin of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from that
city, while walkin throuh the streets with his wife, some Italians
called out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive
smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leavin them
tomorrow!"


* "Lon live the kin."

But thouh he firmly believed himself to be Kin of Naples and pitied
the rief felt by the subjects he was abandonin, latterly, after he had
been ordered to return to military service--and especially since his
last interview with Napoleon in Danzi, when his auust brother-in-law
had told him: "I made you Kin that you should rein in my way, but not
in yours!"--he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and--like
a well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and rows
skittish between the shafts--he dressed up in clothes as varieated and
expensive as possible, and aily and contentedly alloped alon the
roads of Poland, without himself knowin why or whither.

On seein the Russian eneral he threw back his head, with its lon hair
curlin to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner, and looked
inquirinly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed His
Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce.

"De Bal-macheve!" said the Kin (overcomin by his assurance the
difficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to make
your acquaintance, eneral!" he added, with a esture of kinly
condescension.

As soon as the Kin bean to speak loud and fast his royal dinity
instantly forsook him, and without noticin it he passed into his
natural tone of ood-natured familiarity. He laid his hand on the
withers of Balashev's horse and said:

"Well, eneral, it all looks like war," as if rerettin a circumstance
of which he was unable to jude.

"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does not
desire war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, usin the words
Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable in
frequently addressin one to whom the title was still a novelty.

Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to "Monsieur
de Bal-macheve." But royaute oblie! * and he felt it incumbent on him,
as a kin and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander's
envoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and movin a few steps away
from his suite, which waited respectfully, bean to pace up and down
with him, tryin to speak sinificantly. He referred to the fact that
the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw his
troops from Prussia, especially when that demand became enerally known
and the dinity of France was thereby offended.


* "Royalty has its obliations."

Balashev replied that there was "nothin offensive in the demand,
because..." but Murat interrupted him.

"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aressor?" he asked
unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.

Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the oriinator of the
war.

"Oh, my dear eneral!" Murat aain interrupted him, "with all my heart I
wish the Emperors may arrane the affair between them, and that the war
beun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he, in
the tone of a servant who wants to remain ood friends with another
despite a quarrel between their masters.

And he went on to inquiries about the rand Duke and the state of his
health, and to reminiscences of the ay and amusin times he had spent
with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if rememberin his royal dinity,
Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood
at his coronation, and, wavin his riht arm, said:

"I won't detain you loner, eneral. I wish success to your mission,"
and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowin feathers, and his
litterin ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully
awaitin him.

Balashev rode on, supposin from Murat's words that he would very soon
be brouht before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next
villae the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as the
pickets of the vanuard had done, and an adjutant of the corps
commander, who was fetched, conducted him into the villae to Marshal
Davout.




CHAPTER V

Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--thouh not a
coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable to
express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.

In the oranism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are
necessary in the oranism of nature, and they always exist, always
appear and hold their own, however inconruous their presence and their
proximity to the head of the overnment may be. This inevitability alone
can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out a renadier's mustache
with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face
daner, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was
chivalrous, noble, and entle.

Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,
writin--he was auditin accounts. Better quarters could have been found
him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put
themselves in most depressin conditions to have a justification for
bein loomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in a
hurry. "How can I think of the briht side of life when, as you see, I
am sittin on a barrel and workin in a dirty shed?" the expression of
his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and necessity of such men,
when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their own
dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure when
Balashev was brouht in. He became still more absorbed in his task when
the Russian eneral entered, and after lancin over his spectacles at
Balashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the mornin and by
his talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still
more and sneered malevolently.

When he noticed in Balashev's face the disareeable impression this
reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he
wanted.

Thinkin he could have been received in such a manner only because
Davout did not know that he was adjutant eneral to the Emperor
Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to inform
him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after
hearin him, became still surlier and ruder.

"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "ive it to me. I will send it to
the Emperor."

Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to the
Emperor.

"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout,
"you must do as you're told."

And, as if to make the Russian eneral still more conscious of his
dependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer
on duty.

Balashev took out the packet containin the Emperor's letter and laid it
on the table (made of a door with its hines still hanin on it, laid
across two barrels). Davout took the packet and read the inscription.

"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"
protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor to
be adjutant eneral to His Majesty...."

Davout lanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the
sins of aitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face.

"You will be treated as is fittin," said he and, puttin the packet in
his pocket, left the shed.

A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conducted
Balashev to the quarters assined him.

That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.

Next day Davout rode out early and, after askin Balashev to come to
him, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with the
baae train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no one
except Monsieur de Castres.

After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence
and insinificance--particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of
power in which he had so lately moved--and after several marches with
the marshal's baae and the French army, which occupied the whole
district, Balashev was brouht to Vilna--now occupied by the French--
throuh the very ate by which he had left it four days previously.

Next day the imperial entleman-in-waitin, the Comte de Turenne, came
to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor him
with an audience.

Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk reiment had stood in
front of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now two French
renadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with
shay caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and uhlans and a
brilliant suite of aides-de-camp, paes, and enerals, who were waitin
for Napoleon to come out, were standin at the porch, round his saddle
horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the very
house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.




CHAPTER VI

Thouh Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury
and manificence of Napoleon's court.

The Comte de Turenne showed him into a bi reception room where many
enerals, entlemen-in-waitin, and Polish manates--several of whom
Balashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia--were waitin.
Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian eneral before oin
for his ride.

After some minutes, the entleman-in-waitin who was on duty came into
the reat reception room and, bowin politely, asked Balashev to follow
him.

Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led into a
study, the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him on
his mission. He stood a minute or two, waitin. He heard hurried
footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; all
was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,
firm and resolute--they were those of Napoleon. He had just finished
dressin for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, openin in front over a
white waistcoat so lon that it covered his rotund stomach, white
leather breeches tihtly fittin the fat thihs of his short les, and
Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but one
lock hun down in the middle of his broad forehead. His plump white neck
stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelled
of Eau de Colone. His full face, rather youn-lookin, with its
prominent chin, wore a racious and majestic expression of imperial
welcome.

He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slihtly
thrown back. His whole short corpulent fiure with broad thick
shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protrudin, had that
imposin and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live in
comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits that
day.

He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and comin up
to him at once bean speakin like a man who values every moment of his
time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure
he will always say the riht thin and say it well.

"ood day, eneral!" said he. "I have received the letter you brouht
from the Emperor Alexander and am very lad to see you." He lanced with
his lare eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.

It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all.
Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him.
Nothin outside himself had any sinificance for him, because everythin
in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will.

"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has been
forced on me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready to receive
any explanations you can ive me."

And he bean clearly and concisely to explain his reasons for
dissatisfaction with the Russian overnment. Judin by the calmly
moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev
was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into
neotiations.

When Napoleon, havin finished speakin, looked inquirinly at the
Russian envoy, Balashev bean a speech he had prepared lon before:
"Sire! The Emperor, my master..." but the siht of the Emperor's eyes
bent on him confused him. "You are flurried--compose yourself!" Napoleon
seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked at
Balashev's uniform and sword.

Balashev recovered himself and bean to speak. He said that the Emperor
Alexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for his passports a
sufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiative
and without his soverein's assent, that the Emperor Alexander did not
desire war, and had no relations with Enland.

"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearin to ive vent to his
feelins, he frowned and nodded slihtly as a sin that Balashev miht
proceed.

After sayin all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that the
Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter into
neotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated: he
remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his
letter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had
told Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these words,
"So lon as a sinle armed foe remains on Russian soil," but some
complex feelin restrained him. He could not utter them, thouh he
wished to do so. He rew confused and said: "On condition that the
French army retires beyond the Niemen."

Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when utterin these last
words; his face twitched and the calf of his left le bean to quiver
rhythmically. Without movin from where he stood he bean speakin in a
louder tone and more hurriedly than before. Durin the speech that
followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily
noticed the quiverin of Napoleon's left le which increased the more
Napoleon raised his voice.

"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he bean. "Have I
not for eihteen months been doin everythin to obtain it? I have
waited eihteen months for explanations. But in order to bein
neotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frownin and makin an
eneretic esture of inquiry with his small white plump hand.

"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Balashev.

"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyond
the Niemen--only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, lookin straiht at
Balashev.

The latter bowed his head respectfully.

Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,
only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turned
quickly and bean to pace the room.

"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen
before commencin neotiations, but in just the same way two months ao
the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder,
and yet you are willin to neotiate."

He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and aain
stopped in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left le was
quiverin faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its stern
expression. This quiverin of his left le was a thin Napoleon was
conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a reat sin with me,"
he remarked at a later date.

"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to a
Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to his
own surprise. "If you ave me Petersbur and Moscow I could not accept
such conditions. You say I have beun this war! But who first joined his
army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me neotiations when I
have expended millions, when you are in alliance with Enland, and when
your position is a bad one. You offer me neotiations! But what is the
aim of your alliance with Enland? What has she iven you?" he continued
hurriedly, evidently no loner tryin to show the advantaes of peace
and discuss its possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and
power and Alexander's errors and duplicity.

The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with the
intention of demonstratin the advantaes of his position and showin
that he was nevertheless willin to neotiate. But he had beun talkin,
and the more he talked the less could he control his words.

The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself and
insult Alexander--just what he had least desired at the commencement of
the interview.

"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"

Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.

"Peace has been concluded..." he bean.

But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all the
talkin himself, and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence and
unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone.

"Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtainin
Moldavia and Wallachia; I would have iven your soverein those
provinces as I ave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and would
have iven the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he
won't have those splendid provinces. Yet he miht have united them to
his empire and in a sinle rein would have extended Russia from the
ulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the reat could
not have done more," said Napoleon, rowin more and more excited as he
paced up and down the room, repeatin to Balashev almost the very words
he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would have
owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid rein!" he repeated several
times, then paused, drew from his pocket a old snuffbox, lifted it to
his nose, and reedily sniffed at it.

"What a splendid rein the Emperor Alexander's miht have been!"

He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter tried
to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.

"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained throuh
my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shruin his shoulders in
perplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with my
enemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennisens, and
Wintzinerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;
Armfeldt, a rake and an intriuer; Wintzinerode, a fuitive French
subject; Bennisen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all
the same an incompetent who was unable to do anythin in 1807 and who
should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind....
ranted that were they competent they miht be made use of," continued
Napoleon--hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thouhts
that incessantly spran up, provin how riht and stron he was (in his
perception the two were one and the same)--"but they are not even that!
They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the most
capable of them all, but I cannot say so, judin by his first
movements. And what are they doin, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes,
Armfeldt disputes, Bennisen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,
does not know what to decide on, and time passes brinin no result.
Baration alone is a military man. He's stupid, but he has experience, a
quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your youn monarch
playin in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him
the responsibility for all that happens. A soverein should not be with
the army unless he is a eneral!" said Napoleon, evidently utterin
these words as a direct challene to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander
desired to be a military commander.

"The campain bean only a week ao, and you haven't even been able to
defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish
provinces. Your army is rumblin."

"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to remember
what had been said to him and followin these verbal fireworks with
difficulty, "the troops are burnin with eaerness..."

"I know everythin!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everythin. I
know the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You have
not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I ive
you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forettin that his word of honor
could carry no weiht--"I ive you my word of honor that I have five
hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will
be of no use to you; they are worth nothin and have shown it by makin
peace with you. As for the Swedes--it is their fate to be overned by
mad kins. Their kin was insane and they chaned him for another--
Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no Swede would ally himself with
Russia unless he were mad."

Napoleon rinned maliciously and aain raised his snuffbox to his nose.

Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would have
done so; he continually made the esture of a man wishin to say
somethin, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleed insanity
of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her side
Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleon ave an anry exclamation
to drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which
a man has to talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he is
in the riht. Balashev bean to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared
to demean his dinity and felt the necessity of replyin; but, as a man,
he shrank before the transport of roundless wrath that had evidently
seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon
had any sinificance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of them
when he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, lookin
at the movements of Napoleon's stout les and tryin to avoid meetin
his eyes.

"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have allies--
the Poles. There are eihty thousand of them and they fiht like lions.
And there will be two hundred thousand of them."

And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered this
obvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently before him in
the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned round,
drew close to Balashev's face, and, esticulatin rapidly and
eneretically with his white hands, almost shouted:

"Know that if you stir up Prussia aainst me, I'll wipe it off the map
of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by aner, and he
struck one of his small hands eneretically with the other. "Yes, I will
throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will re-
erect aainst you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europe
to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you. That is
what you have ained by alienatin me!" And he walked silently several
times up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitchin.

He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out aain, lifted
it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. He
paused, looked ironically straiht into Balashev's eyes, and said in a
quiet voice:

"And yet what a splendid rein your master miht have had!"

Balashev, feelin it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the
Russian side thins did not appear in so loomy a liht. Napoleon was
silent, still lookin derisively at him and evidently not listenin to
him. Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected from
the war. Napoleon nodded condescendinly, as if to say, "I know it's
your duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself. I have
convinced you."

When Balashev had ended, Napoleon aain took out his snuffbox, sniffed
at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a sinal. The door
opened, a entleman-in-waitin, bendin respectfully, handed the Emperor
his hat and loves; another brouht him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon,
without ivin them a lance, turned to Balashev:

"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, takin his hat, "that I
am as devoted to him as before: I know him thorouhly and very hihly
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no loner, eneral; you
shall receive my letter to the Emperor."

And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception room
rushed forward and descended the staircase.




CHAPTER VII

After all that Napoleon had said to him--those bursts of aner and the
last dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no loner, eneral; you
shall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would
not wish to see him, and would even avoid another meetin with him--an
insulted envoy--especially as he had witnessed his unseemly aner. But,
to his surprise, Balashev received, throuh Duroc, an invitation to dine
with the Emperor that day.

Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.

Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no sin
of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that mornin,
but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that he
had lon been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a
mistake, and that in his perception whatever he did was riht, not
because it harmonized with any idea of riht and wron, but because he
did it.

The Emperor was in very ood spirits after his ride throuh Vilna, where
crowds of people had rapturously reeted and followed him. From all the
windows of the streets throuh which he rode, rus, flas, and his
monoram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcomin him, waved
their handkerchiefs to him.

At dinner, havin placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treated
him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers,
one of those who sympathized with his plans and ouht to rejoice at his
success. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and
questioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as an
interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as if
convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered by his
curiosity.

"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it true
that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there in
Moscow?" he asked.

And receivin the reply that there were more than two hundred churches,
he remarked:

"Why such a quantity of churches?"

"The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.

"But a lare number of monasteries and churches is always a sin of the
backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turnin to Caulaincourt for
appreciation of this remark.

Balashev respectfully ventured to disaree with the French Emperor.

"Every country has its own character," said he.

"But nowhere in Europe is there anythin like that," said Napoleon.

"I be your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia there
is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."

This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of the
French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander's
court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where it
passed unnoticed.

The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that they
were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suested. "If there is a point
we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions seemed to
say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did not
notice it at all and naively asked Balashev throuh what towns the
direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the alert
all throuh the dinner, replied that just as "all roads lead to Rome,"
so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and "amon them the
road throuh Poltava, which Charles XII chose." Balashev involuntarily
flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had he
uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt bean speakin of the
badness of the road from Petersbur to Moscow and of his Petersbur
reminiscences.

After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four
days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat
down, toyin with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a
chair beside him.

Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than any
reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed to
consider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded by
men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner,
Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with a
pleasant, thouh slihtly ironic, smile.

"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strane,
isn't it, eneral?" he said, evidently not doubtin that this remark
would be areeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's,
superiority to Alexander.

Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence.

"Yes. Four days ao in this room, Wintzinerode and Stein were
deliberatin," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and self-
confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is that the
Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies. That
I do not... understand. Has he not thouht that I may do the same?" and
he turned inquirinly to Balashev, and evidently this thouht turned him
back on to the track of his mornin's aner, which was still fresh in
him.

"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, risin and pushin
his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttember, Baden, and
Weimar relations out of ermany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let him
prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"

Balashev bowed his head with an air indicatin that he would like to
make his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not help
hearin what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;
he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man now
fully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's
humiliation.

"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is
the ood of that? War is my profession, but his business is to rein and
not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such a
responsibility?"

Aain Napoleon brouht out his snuffbox, paced several times up and down
the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up to
Balashev and with a sliht smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply as
if he were doin somethin not merely important but pleasin to
Balashev, he raised his hand to the forty-year-old Russian eneral's
face and, takin him by the ear, pulled it ently, smilin with his lips
only.

To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the reatest
honor and mark of favor at the French court.

"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't you say
anythin?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be the
adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horses
ready for the eneral?" he added, with a sliht inclination of his head
in reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a lon way to
o!"

The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.
Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,
and the war bean...




CHAPTER VIII

After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to
Petersbur, on business as he told his family, but really to meet
Anatole Kurain whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reachin
Petersbur he inquired for Kurain but the latter had already left the
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on his
track. Anatole Kurain promptly obtained an appointment from the
Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While in
Petersbur Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was
always well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suested that he should
accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old eneral had been
appointed commander-in-chief. So Prince Andrew, havin received an
appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.

Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challene Kurain. He
thouht that if he challened him without some fresh cause it miht
compromise the youn Countess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kurain
personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he aain
failed to meet Kurain in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived,
the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions,
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
faith with him--which he felt the more acutely the more he tried to
conceal its effects--the surroundins in which he had been happy became
tryin to him, and the freedom and independence he had once prized so
hihly were still more so. Not only could he no loner think the
thouhts that had first come to him as he lay azin at the sky on the
field of Austerlitz and had later enlared upon with Pierre, and which
had filled his solitude at Boucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,
but he even dreaded to recall them and the briht and boundless horizons
they had revealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practical
matters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more
eaerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as if
that lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above him
had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weihed him down, in
which all was clear, but nothin eternal or mysterious.

Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the
simplest and most familiar. As a eneral on duty on Kutuzov's staff, he
applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised
Kutuzov by his willinness and accuracy in work. Not havin found
Kurain in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush back
to Russia after him, but all the same he knew that however lon it miht
be before he met Kurain, despite his contempt for him and despite all
the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stoopin
to a conflict with him--he knew that when he did meet him he would not
be able to resist callin him out, any more than a ravenous man can help
snatchin at food. And the consciousness that the insult was not yet
avened, that his rancor was still unspent, weihed on his heart and
poisoned the artificial tranquillity which he manaed to obtain in
Turkey by means of restless, ploddin, and rather vainlorious and
ambitious activity.

In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached Bucharest--
where Kutuzov had been livin for two months, passin his days and
nihts with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov to transfer
him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of Bolkonski's
activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very readily let him
o and ave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.

Before joinin the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped at
Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,
bein only two miles off the Smolensk hihroad. Durin the last three
years there had been so many chanes in his life, he had thouht, felt,
and seen so much (havin traveled both in the east and the west), that
on reachin Bald Hills it struck him as strane and unexpected to find
the way of life there unchaned and still the same in every detail. He
entered throuh the ates with their stone pillars and drove up the
avenue leadin to the house as if he were enterin an enchanted,
sleepin castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the
same stillness reined there, and inside there was the same furniture,
the same walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only
somewhat older. Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maiden
ettin on in years, uselessly and joylessly passin the best years of
her life in fear and constant sufferin. Mademoiselle Bourienne was the
same coquettish, self-satisfied irl, enjoyin every moment of her
existence and full of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become
more self-confident, Prince Andrew thouht. Dessalles, the tutor he had
brouht from Switzerland, was wearin a coat of Russian cut and talkin
broken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowly
intellient, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince had
chaned in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left a
noticeable ap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same as
ever, only showin still more irritability and skepticism as to what was
happenin in the world. Little Nicholas alone had chaned. He had rown,
become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and lauhin, quite
unconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just as
the little princess used to do. He alone did not obey the law of
immutability in the enchanted, sleepin castle. But thouh externally
all remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people had
chaned since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was
divided into two alien and hostile camps, who chaned their habits for
his sake and only met because he was there. To the one camp beloned the
old prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other
Princess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and
maids.

Durin his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined toether, but they
were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose
sake an exception was bein made and that his presence made them all
feel awkward. Involuntarily feelin this at dinner on the first day, he
was taciturn, and the old prince noticin this also became morosely dumb
and retired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evenin,
when Prince Andrew went to him and, tryin to rouse him, bean to tell
him of the youn Count Kamensky's campain, the old prince bean
unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blamin her for her
superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, he said,
was the only person really attached to him.

The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess
Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that by
indulence and silly talk she was spoilin little Prince Nicholas. The
old prince knew very well that he tormented his dauhter and that her
life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormentin
her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,
say nothin to me about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or an
old fool who, without any reason, keeps his own dauhter at a distance
and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so I
must explain it, and he must hear me out," thouht the old prince. And
he bean explainin why he could not put up with his dauhter's
unreasonable character.

"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without lookin up (he was
censurin his father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish to
speak about it, but as you ask me I will ive you my frank opinion. If
there is any misunderstandin and discord between you and Mary, I can't
blame her for it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Since
you ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becomin irritable--as he was
always liable to do of late--"I can only say that if there are any
misunderstandins they are caused by that worthless woman, who is not
fit to be my sister's companion."

The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smile
disclosed the fresh ap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could
not et accustomed.

"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talkin it over!
Eh?"

"Father, I did not want to jude," said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
bitter tone, "but you challened me, and I have said, and always shall
say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame--the one to blame--is
that Frenchwoman."

"Ah, he has passed judment... passed judement!" said the old man in a
low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment,
but then he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, be off! Let not a
trace of you remain here!..."

Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded him
to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did not
leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and
Tikhon, but asked several times whether his son had one. Next day,
before leavin, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy, curly-
headed like his mother and lowin with health, sat on his knee, and
Prince Andrew bean tellin him the story of Bluebeard, but fell into a
reverie without finishin the story. He thouht not of this pretty
child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. He souht in
himself either remorse for havin anered his father or reret at
leavin home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him, and
was horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that he
souht and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son
which he had hoped to reawaken by caressin the boy and takin him on
his knee.

"Well, o on!" said his son.

Prince Andrew, without replyin, put him down from his knee and went out
of the room.

As soon as Prince Andrew had iven up his daily occupations, and
especially on returnin to the old conditions of life amid which he had
been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,
and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work as
soon as possible.

"So you've decided to o, Andrew?" asked his sister.

"Thank od that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry you
can't."

"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say that, when
you are oin to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle
Bourienne says he has been askin about you...."

As soon as she bean to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tears
bean to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and bean pacin the room.

"Ah, my od! my od! When one thinks who and what--what trash--can cause
people misery!" he said with a malinity that alarmed Princess Mary.

She understood that when speakin of "trash" he referred not only to
Mademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who
had ruined his own happiness.

"Andrew! One thin I be, I entreat of you!" she said, touchin his
elbow and lookin at him with eyes that shone throuh her tears. "I
understand you" (she looked down). "Don't imaine that sorrow is the
work of men. Men are His tools." She looked a little above Prince
Andrew's head with the confident, accustomed look with which one looks
at the place where a familiar portrait hans. "Sorrow is sent by Him,
not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If you think
someone has wroned you, foret it and forive! We have no riht to
punish. And then you will know the happiness of forivin."

"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But a
man should not and cannot forive and foret," he replied, and thouh
till that moment he had not been thinkin of Kurain, all his unexpended
aner suddenly swelled up in his heart.

"If Mary is already persuadin me to forive, it means that I ouht lon
ao to have punished him," he thouht. And ivin her no further reply,
he bean thinkin of the lad vindictive moment when he would meet
Kurain who he knew was now in the army.

Princess Mary beed him to stay one day more, sayin that she knew how
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without bein reconciled to
him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back aain
from the army and would certainly write to his father, but that the
loner he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become.

"ood-bye, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from od, and men are
never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when he
took leave of her.

"Then it must be so!" thouht Prince Andrew as he drove out of the
avenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature, is
left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old
man feels he is uilty, but cannot chane himself. My boy is rowin up
and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or be
deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want to
meet that man whom I despise, so as to ive him a chance to kill and
lauh at me!"

These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they were
all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senseless
thins, lackin coherence, presented themselves one after another to
Prince Andrew's mind.




CHAPTER IX

Prince Andrew reached the eneral headquarters of the army at the end of
June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied the fortified
camp at Drissa; the second army was retreatin, tryin to effect a
junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by
lare French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the eneral course
of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any daner of
invasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thouht the war would
extend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.

Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assined, on
the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a sinle town or lare villae
in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of enerals and
courtiers accompanyin the army were livin in the best houses of the
villaes on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay
de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received
Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his forein accent that he
would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment,
but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff. Anatole Kurain, whom
Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there. He had
one to Petersbur, but Prince Andrew was lad to hear this. His mind
was occupied by the interests of the center that was conductin a
iantic war, and he was lad to be free for a while from the
distraction caused by the thouht of Kurain. Durin the first four
days, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round the
whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowlede and by talks
with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But the
question whether the camp was advantaeous or disadvantaeous remained
for him undecided. Already from his military experience and what he had
seen in the Austrian campain, he had come to the conclusion that in war
the most deeply considered plans have no sinificance and that all
depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy--that cannot be
foreseen--are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.
To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizin his
position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control
of the army and of the men and parties enaed in it, and he deduced for
himself the followin of the state of affairs.

While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been divided
into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, the
army under Baration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormasov. The
Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander-in-chief. In the
orders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command,
but only that he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had with
him not a commander-in-chief's staff but the imperial headquarters
staff. In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff,
Quartermaster eneral Prince Volkonski, as well as enerals, imperial
aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a lare number of foreiners,
but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the
Emperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister of
War; Count Bennisen, the senior eneral in rank; the rand Duke
Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor;
Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish eneral; Pfuel,
the chief author of the plan of campain; Paulucci, an adjutant eneral
and Sardinian emire; Wolzoen--and many others. Thouh these men had no
military appointment in the army, their position ave them influence,
and often a corps commander, or even the commander-in-chief, did not
know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennisen, the rand Duke,
Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was iven this or that advice and did
not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated
from the man who ave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be
executed or not. But this was only the external condition; the essential
sinificance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,
from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's vicinity all became
courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did not
assume the title of commander-in-chief, but disposed of all the armies;
the men around him were his assistants. Arakcheev was a faithful
custodian to enforce order and acted as the soverein's bodyuard.
Bennisen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doin
the honors of the district, but was in reality a ood eneral, useful as
an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The rand Duke was
there because it suited him to be. The ex-Minister Stein was there
because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in hih
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a eneral
full of self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. The
adjutants eneral were there because they always accompanied the
Emperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up
the plan of campain aainst Napoleon and, havin induced Alexander to
believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directin the whole business
of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzoen, who expressed Pfuel's thouhts in a
more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookish
theorist, self-confident to the point of despisin everyone else) was
able to do.

Besides these Russians and foreiners who propounded new and unexpected
ideas every day--especially the foreiners, who did so with a boldness
characteristic of people employed in a country not their own--there were
many secondary personaes accompanyin the army because their principals
were there.

Amon the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant, and
proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the followin sharply defined
subdivisions of tendencies and parties:

The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military theorists
who believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws of oblique
movements, outflankins, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demanded
a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise
laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism,
inorance, or evil intention in every deviation from that theory. To
this party beloned the forein nobles, Wolzoen, Wintzinerode, and
others, chiefly ermans.

The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, as
always happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members of
this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland
and freedom from all prearraned plans. Besides bein advocates of bold
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still
more one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Baration, Ermolov
(who was beinnin to come to the front), and others. At that time a
famous joke of Ermolov's was bein circulated, that as a reat favor he
had petitioned the Emperor to make him a erman. The men of that party,
rememberin Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason, or
stick pins into maps, but to fiht, beat the enemy, keep him out of
Russia, and not let the army et discouraed.

To the third party--in which the Emperor had most confidence--beloned
the courtiers who tried to arrane compromises between the other two.
The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev
beloned, thouht and said what men who have no convictions but wish to
seem to have some enerally say. They said that undoubtedly war,
particularly aainst such a enius as Bonaparte (they called him
Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific
knowlede and in that respect Pfuel was a enius, but at the same time
it had to be acknowleded that the theorists are often one-sided, and
therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should also listen
to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had
to say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention
of the camp at Drissa, accordin to Pfuel's plan, but on chanin the
movements of the other armies. Thouh, by this course, neither one aim
nor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of
this third party.

Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the
Tsarevich, who could not foret his disillusionment at Austerlitz, where
he had ridden out at the head of the uards, in his casque and cavalry
uniform as to a review, expectin to crush the French allantly; but
unexpectedly findin himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid
the eneral confusion. The men of this party had both the quality and
the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
reconized his strenth and their own weakness, and frankly said so.
They said: "Nothin but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of all this!
We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa. The only
reasonable thin left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,
before we are turned out of Petersbur."

This view was very eneral in the upper army circles and found support
also in Petersbur and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for other
reasons of state, was in favor of peace.

The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de
Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander-in-
chief. "Be he what he may" (they always bean like that), "he is an
honest, practical man and we have nobody better. ive him real power,
for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, and
he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If our army is well
oranized and stron and has withdrawn to Drissa without sufferin any
defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to be
superseded by Bennisen all will be lost, for Bennisen showed his
incapacity already in 1807."

The sixth party, the Bennisenites, said, on the contrary, that at any
rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennisen: "and
twist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennisen eventually.
Let the others make mistakes now!" said they, aruin that our
retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series
of blunders. "The more mistakes that are made the better. It will at any
rate be understood all the sooner that thins cannot o on like this.
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennisen,
who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice--a
man whose authority would be willinly reconized, and Bennisen is the
only such man."

The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be
found, especially around youn sovereins, and of whom there were
particularly many round Alexander--enerals and imperial aides-de-camp
passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as a
man, adorin him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done in
1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human
capabilities as well. These men, thouh enchanted with the soverein for
refusin the command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessive
modesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored soverein
should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place
himself at the head of the army, ather round him a commander-in-chief's
staff, and, consultin experienced theoreticians and practical men where
necessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits would thereby be
raised to the hihest pitch.

The eihth and larest roup, which in its enormous numbers was to the
others as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither peace
nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa or
anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor
Bennisen, but only the one most essential thin--as much advantae and
pleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters of
conflictin and intersectin intriues that eddied about the Emperor's
headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at
other times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would
today aree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,
merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare
that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to ain
some advantae would attract the Emperor's attention by loudly
advocatin the very thin the Emperor had hinted at the day before, and
would dispute and shout at the council, beatin his breast and
challenin those who did not aree with him to duels, thereby provin
that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common ood. A third,
in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit a
special ratuity for his faithful services, well knowin that at that
moment people would be too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seeminly
overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor's
eye. A fifth, to achieve his lon-cherished aim of dinin with the
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some
newly emerin opinion and for this object would produce aruments more
or less forcible and correct.

All the men of this party were fishin for rubles, decorations, and
promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial
favor, and directly they noticed it turnin in any direction, this whole
drone population of the army bean blowin hard that way, so that it was
all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the
uncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious daner ivin
a peculiarly threatenin character to everythin, amid this vortex of
intriue, eotism, conflict of views and feelins, and the diversity of
race amon these people--this eihth and larest party of those
preoccupied with personal interests imparted reat confusion and
obscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these
drones, without havin finished their buzzin on a previous theme, flew
over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of
those who were disputin honestly.

From amon all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached the
army, another, a ninth party, was bein formed and was beinnin to
raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men
experienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharin any of
those conflictin opinions, were able to take a detached view of what
was oin on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of
escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.

The men of this party said and thouht that what was wron resulted
chiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with his military court
and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,
and unsteady fluctuation of relations, which is in place at court but
harmful in an army; that a soverein should rein but not command the
army, and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor
and his court to leave the army; that the mere presence of the Emperor
paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his
personal safety, and that the worst commander-in-chief, if independent,
would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and
authority of the monarch.

Just at the time Prince Andrew was livin unoccupied at Drissa,
Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of
this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev
areed to sin. In this letter, availin himself of permission iven him
by the Emperor to discuss the eneral course of affairs, he respectfully
suested--on the plea that it was necessary for the soverein to arouse
a warlike spirit in the people of the capital--that the Emperor should
leave the army.

That arousin of the people by their soverein and his call to them to
defend their country--the very incitement which was the chief cause of
Russia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal
presence in Moscow--was suested to the Emperor, and accepted by him,
as a pretext for quittin the army.




CHAPTER X

This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, one
day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the soverein wished to see him
personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to
present himself at Bennisen's quarters at six that evenin.

News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh
movement by Napoleon which miht endaner the army--news subsequently
found to be false. And that mornin Colonel Michaud had ridden round the
Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that
this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered a
chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's
destruction, was an absurdity, threatenin the destruction of the
Russian army.

Prince Andrew arrived at Bennisen's quarters--a country entleman's
house of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. Neither
Bennisen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, the Emperor's aide-
de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor,
accompanied by eneral Bennisen and Marquis Paulucci, had one a second
time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the
suitability of which serious doubts were beinnin to be felt.

Chernyshev was sittin at a window in the first room with a French novel
in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was still
an oran in it on which some rus were piled, and in one corner stood
the foldin bedstead of Bennisen's adjutant. This adjutant was also
there and sat dozin on the rolled-up beddin, evidently exhausted by
work or by feastin. Two doors led from the room, one straiht on into
what had been the drawin room, and another, on the riht, to the study.
Throuh the first door came the sound of voices conversin in erman and
occasionally in French. In that drawin room were athered, by the
Emperor's wish, not a military council (the Emperor preferred
indefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in
view of the impendin difficulties. It was not a council of war, but, as
it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish eneral
Armfeldt, Adjutant eneral Wolzoen, Wintzinerode (whom Napoleon had
referred to as a reneade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein
who was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince
Andrew had heard, was the mainsprin of the whole affair. Prince Andrew
had an opportunity of ettin a ood look at him, for Pfuel arrived soon
after himself and, in passin throuh to the drawin room, stopped a
minute to speak to Chernyshev.

At first siht, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian eneral,
which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Prince
Andrew, thouh he saw him now for the first time. There was about him
somethin of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other erman
theorist-enerals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more
typical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a erman
theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to
such an extent.

Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build,
broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was much
wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastily
brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaint
little tufts. He entered the room, lookin restlessly and anrily
around, as if afraid of everythin in that lare apartment. Awkwardly
holdin up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in erman where
the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass throuh the rooms
as quickly as possible, finish with the bows and reetins, and sit down
to business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. He nodded
hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on hearin that
the soverein was inspectin the fortifications that he, Pfuel, had
planned in accord with his theory. He muttered somethin to himself
abruptly and in a bass voice, as self-assured ermans do--it miht have
been "stupid fellow"... or "the whole affair will be ruined," or
"somethin absurd will come of it."... Prince Andrew did not catch what
he said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev introduced him to
Pfuel, remarkin that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the
war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely lanced--not so much at
Prince Andrew as past him--and said, with a lauh: "That must have been
a fine tactical war"; and, lauhin contemptuously, went on into the
room from which the sound of voices was heard.

Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularly
disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect
and criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview with
Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to
form a clear conception of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelessly
and immutably self-confident men, self-confident to the point of
martyrdom as only ermans are, because only ermans are self-confident
on the basis of an abstract notion--science, that is, the supposed
knowlede of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured because he
reards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly
attractive to men and women. An Enlishman is self-assured, as bein a
citizen of the best-oranized state in the world, and therefore as an
Enlishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as
an Enlishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because
he is excitable and easily forets himself and other people. A Russian
is self-assured just because he knows nothin and does not want to know
anythin, since he does not believe that anythin can be known. The
erman's self-assurance is worst of all, stroner and more repulsive
than any other, because he imaines that he knows the truth--science--
which he himself has invented but which is for him the absolute truth.

Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science--the theory of
oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the
reat's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent
warfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions in
which so many blunders were committed by both sides that these wars
could not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, and
therefore could not serve as material for science.

In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of
campain that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least
proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war. On
the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,
the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristically
leeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair would
o to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love their
theory that they lose siht of the theory's object--its practical
application. His love of theory made him hate everythin practical, and
he would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failures
resultin from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to him
the accuracy of his theory.

He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present
war, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will o wron,
and who is not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts of
hair stickin up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his temples
expressed this most eloquently.

He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of his
voice were at once heard from there.




CHAPTER XI

Prince Andrew's eyes were still followin Pfuel out of the room when
Count Bennisen entered hurriedly, and noddin to Bolkonski, but not
pausin, went into the study, ivin instructions to his adjutant as he
went. The Emperor was followin him, and Bennisen had hastened on to
make some preparations and to be ready to receive the soverein.
Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,
who looked fatiued, was dismountin. Marquis Paulucci was talkin to
him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to the
left, was listenin with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor moved forward
evidently wishin to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited
Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.

"And as for the man who advised formin this camp--the Drissa camp,"
said Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticin Prince
Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..."
continued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself,
"the man who advised the Drissa camp--I see no alternative but the
lunatic asylum or the allows!"

Without heedin the end of the Italian's remarks, and as thouh not
hearin them, the Emperor, reconizin Bolkonski, addressed him
raciously.

"I am very lad to see you! o in there where they are meetin, and wait
for me."

The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter
Mikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.
Prince Andrew, takin advantae of the Emperor's permission, accompanied
Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawin room where the
council was assembled.

Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were,
of chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into the
drawin room with some maps which he spread on a table, and put
questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the entlemen
present. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to be
false) had been received durin the niht of a movement by the French to
outflank the Drissa camp.

The first to speak was eneral Armfeldt who, to meet the difficulty that
presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position away
from the Petersbur and Moscow roads. The reason for this was
inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have an
opinion), but he ured that at this point the army should unite and
there await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had thouht out that
plan lon ao and now expounded it not so much to answer the questions
put--which, in fact, his plan did not answer--as to avail himself of the
opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one as
ood as another, that could be made as lon as it was quite unknown what
character the war would take. Some disputed his aruments, others
defended them. Youn Count Toll objected to the Swedish eneral's views
more warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew from
his side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission to
read to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suested another scheme,
totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campain. In answer
to Toll, Paulucci suested an advance and an attack, which, he ured,
could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap
(as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.

Durin all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzoen (his
"bride" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snorted
contemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demean
himself by replyin to such nonsense as he was now hearin. So when
Prince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to ive his
opinion, he merely said:

"Why ask me? eneral Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an
exposed rear, or why not this Italian entleman's attack--very fine, or
a retreat, also ood! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know
everythin better than I do."

But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's name
that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly rowin animated,
bean to speak:

"Everythin has been spoiled, everythin muddled, everybody thouht they
knew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There
is nothin to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictly
adhered to," said he, drummin on the table with his bony finers. "What
is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"

He went up to the map and speakin rapidly bean provin that no
eventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that
everythin had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really oin to
outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.

Paulucci, who did not know erman, bean questionin him in French.
Wolzoen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,
and bean translatin for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who
was rapidly demonstratin that not only all that had happened, but all
that could happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if there
were now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his plan
had not been precisely executed. He kept lauhin sarcastically, he
demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like a
mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of a
problem that has already been proved. Wolzoen took his place and
continued to explain his views in French, every now and then turnin to
Pfuel and sayin, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man
heated in a fiht who strikes those on his own side, shouted anrily at
his own supporter, Wolzoen:

"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"

Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzoen simultaneously in French.
Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in erman. Toll explained to Volkonski in
Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.

Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, anry,
determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,
evidently he alone was not seekin anythin for himself, nursed no
hatred aainst anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on a
theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was
ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary
respect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Besides this, the remarks
of all except Pfuel had one common trait that had not been noticeable at
the council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon's
enius, which, thouh concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder.
Everythin was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected him
from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other's
proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like
everyone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feelin of
respect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which the
courtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself to
speak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation in
Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel
himself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence
and rumpy erman sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly
brushed on the temples and stickin up in tufts behind. Thouh he
concealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he was
evidently in despair that the sole remainin chance of verifyin his
theory by a hue experiment and provin its soundness to the whole world
was slippin away from him.

The discussions continued a lon time, and the loner they lasted the
more heated became the disputes, culminatin in shouts and
personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any eneral
conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listenin to this
polylot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,
felt nothin but amazement at what they were sayin. A thouht that had
lon since and often occurred to him durin his military activities--the
idea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and that
therefore there can be no such thin as a military enius--now appeared
to him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is possible about a
matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannot
be defined, especially when the strenth of the actin forces cannot be
ascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or
the enemy's armies will be in a day's time, and no one can aue the
force of this or that detachment. Sometimes--when there is not a coward
at the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' and start runnin, but a brave
and jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand is
worth thirty thousand, as at Schon rabern, while at times fifty
thousand run from eiht thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can
there be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothin can
be defined and everythin depends on innumerable conditions, the
sinificance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrives
no one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci
says we have ot the French army between two fires; Michaud says that
the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in havin the river behind it,
and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strenth; Toll proposes one
plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all ood and all bad, and the
advantaes of any suestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.
And why do they all speak of a 'military enius'? Is a man a enius who
can order bread to be brouht up at the riht time and say who is to o
to the riht and who to the left? It is only because military men are
invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power,
attributin to it qualities of enius it does not possess. The best
enerals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-minded
men. Baration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of
Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on the
field of Austerlitz. Not only does a ood army commander not need any
special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the hihest
and best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophic
inquirin doubt. He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he is
doin is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficient
patience), and only then will he be a brave leader. od forbid that he
should be humane, should love, or pity, or think of what is just and
unjust. It is understandable that a theory of their 'enius' was
invented for them lon ao because they have power! The success of a
military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks who
shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks
can one serve with assurance of bein useful."

So thouht Prince Andrew as he listened to the talkin, and he roused
himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leavin.

At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he would
like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standin in court circles
forever by not askin to remain attached to the soverein's person, but
for permission to serve in the army.




CHAPTER XII

Before the beinnin of the campain, Rostov had received a letter from
his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness and the
breakin off of her enaement to Prince Andrew (which they explained by
Natasha's havin rejected him) and aain asked Nicholas to retire from
the army and return home. On receivin this letter, Nicholas did not
even make any attempt to et leave of absence or to retire from the
army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her
enaement broken off, and that he would do all he could to meet their
wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.

"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothin but honor could keep me
from returnin to the country. But now, at the commencement of the
campain, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but in
my own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to the
Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe me, directly
the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I will
throw up everythin and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent
breast."

It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campain that prevented
Rostov from returnin home as he had promised and marryin Sonya. The
autumn in Otradnoe with the huntin, and the winter with the Christmas
holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil
rural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which now
allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a ood pack of hounds, a dozen
leashes of smart borzois, ariculture, neihbors, service by
election..." thouht he. But now the campain was beinnin, and he had
to remain with his reiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov,
as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in the
reiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.

On his return from his furlouh Nicholas, havin been joyfully welcomed
by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brouht back from the
Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation
from his commanders. Durin his absence he had been promoted captain,
and when the reiment was put on war footin with an increase in
numbers, he was aain allotted his old squadron.

The campain bean, the reiment was moved into Poland on double pay,
new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was
infected with the merrily excited mood that oes with the commencement
of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantaeous position in the
reiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests of
military service, thouh he knew that sooner or later he would have to
relinquish them.

The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,
political and strateic. Each step of the retreat was accompanied by a
complicated interplay of interests, aruments, and passions at
headquarters. For the Pavlorad hussars, however, the whole of this
retreat durin the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies
was a very simple and areeable business.

It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, and
intriuin; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves where
they were oin or why. If they reretted havin to retreat, it was only
because they had to leave billets they had rown accustomed to, or some
pretty youn Polish lady. If the thouht that thins looked bad chanced
to enter anyone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a ood
soldier and not to think of the eneral trend of affairs, but only of
the task nearest to hand. First they camped aily before Vilna, makin
acquaintance with the Polish landowners, preparin for reviews and bein
reviewed by the Emperor and other hih commanders. Then came an order to
retreat to Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they could not carry
away with them. Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the
drunken camp, a name the whole army ave to their encampment there, and
because many complaints were made aainst the troops, who, takin
advantae of the order to collect provisions, took also horses,
carriaes, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered
Sventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival at that small town
he chaned his sereant major and was unable to manae all the drunken
men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels
of old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa,
and thence aain beyond Drissa, drawin near to the frontier of Russia
proper.

On the thirteenth of July the Pavlorads took part in a serious action
for the first time.

On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy
storm of rain and hail. In eneral, the summer of 1812 was remarkable
for its storms.

The two Pavlorad squadrons were bivouackin on a field of rye, which
was already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle and
horses. The rain was descendin in torrents, and Rostov, with a youn
officer named Ilyin, his protee, was sittin in a hastily constructed
shelter. An officer of their reiment, with lon mustaches extendin
onto his cheeks, who after ridin to the staff had been overtaken by the
rain, entered Rostov's shelter.

"I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski's
exploit?"

And the officer ave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he had
heard at the staff.

Rostov, smokin his pipe and turnin his head about as the water
trickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasional
lance at Ilyin, who was pressin close to him. This officer, a lad of
sixteen who had recently joined the reiment, was now in the same
relation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven years
before. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everythin and adored him as a
irl miht have done.

Zdrzhinski, the officer with the lon mustache, spoke randiloquently of
the Saltanov dam bein "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthy
of antiquity had been performed by eneral Raevski. He recounted how
Raevski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and had
chared with them beside him. Rostov heard the story and not only said
nothin to encourae Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary,
looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearin, thouh with no
intention of contradictin it. Since the campains of Austerlitz and of
1807 Rostov knew by experience that men always lie when describin
military exploits, as he himself had done when recountin them; besides
that, he had experience enouh to know that nothin happens in war at
all as we can imaine or relate it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's
tale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his mustaches
extendin over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was
his habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him
in silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion
and crowdin on the dam that was bein attacked that if Raevski did lead
his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozen
men nearest to him," thouht he, "the rest could not have seen how or
with whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even those who did see it would
not have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do with
Raevski's tender paternal feelins when their own skins were in daner?
And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether they
took the Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case at
Thermopylae. So why should he have made such a sacrifice? And why expose
his own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Petya
there, or even Ilyin, who's a straner to me but a nice lad, but would
have tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nicholas continued to
think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his
thouhts, for in such matters, too, he had ained experience. He knew
that this tale redounded to the lory of our arms and so one had to
pretend not to doubt it. And he acted accordinly.

"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticin that Rostov did not
relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockins and shirt... and the
water is runnin on my seat! I'll o and look for shelter. The rain
seems less heavy."

Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.

Five minutes later Ilyin, splashin throuh the mud, came runnin back
to the shanty.

"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards away
there's a tavern where ours have already athered. We can at least et
dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."

Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the reimental doctor, a pretty youn
erman woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack of
means or because he did not like to part from his youn wife in the
early days of their marriae, took her about with him wherever the
hussar reiment went and his jealousy had become a standin joke amon
the hussar officers.

Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to
follow with the thins, and--now slippin in the mud, now splashin
riht throuh it--set off with Ilyin in the lessenin rain and the
darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lihtnin.

"Rostov, where are you?"

"Here. What lihtnin!" they called to one another.




CHAPTER XIII

In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were
already some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blonde
erman, in a dressin jacket and nihtcap, was sittin on a broad bench
in the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her.
Rostov and Ilyin, on enterin the room, were welcomed with merry shouts
and lauhter.

"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov lauhin.

"And why do you stand there apin?"

"What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don't make our
drawin room so wet."

"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.

Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could chane into
dry clothes without offendin Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They were
oin into a tiny recess behind a partition to chane, but found it
completely filled by three officers who sat playin cards by the liht
of a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on no
account yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna oblied them with the
loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screen
Rostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who had brouht their kits,
chaned their wet thins for dry ones.

A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found,
fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was
produced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and havin asked Mary
Hendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her a
clean handkerchief to wipe her charmin hands, another spread a jacket
under her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hun his coat
over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the flies
off her husband's face, lest he should wake up.

"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smilin timidly and happily.
"He is sleepin well as it is, after a sleepless niht."

"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look after
the doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes to
cuttin off a le or an arm for me."

There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one could
not make out whether the tea was stron or weak, and the samovar held
only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to take
turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary
Hendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean
nails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love with
her that evenin. Even those playin cards behind the partition soon
left their ame and came over to the samovar, yieldin to the eneral
mood of courtin Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seein herself surrounded by
such brilliant and polite youn men, beamed with satisfaction, try as
she miht to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her
husband moved in his sleep behind her.

There was only one spoon, suar was more plentiful than anythin else,
but it took too lon to dissolve, so it was decided that Mary
Hendrikhovna should stir the suar for everyone in turn. Rostov received
his tumbler, and addin some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stir
it.

"But you take it without suar?" she said, smilin all the time, as if
everythin she said and everythin the others said was very amusin and
had a double meanin.

"It is not the suar I want, but only that your little hand should stir
my tea."

Mary Hendrikhovna assented and bean lookin for the spoon which someone
meanwhile had pounced on.

"Use your finer, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," said
Rostov.

"Too hot!" she replied, blushin with pleasure.

Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brouht it to
Mary Hendrikhovna, askin her to stir it with her finer.

"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finer in it and I'll drink it
all up."

When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards and
proposed that they should play "Kins" with Mary Hendrikhovna. They drew
lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suestion it was
areed that whoever became "Kin" should have the riht to kiss Mary
Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should o to refill and reheat
the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.

"Well, but supposin Mary Hendrikhovna is 'Kin'?" asked Ilyin.

"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"

They had hardly beun to play before the doctor's disheveled head
suddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake for
some time, listenin to what was bein said, and evidently found nothin
entertainin or amusin in what was oin on. His face was sad and
depressed. Without reetin the officers, he scratched himself and asked
to be allowed to pass as they were blockin the way. As soon as he had
left the room all the officers burst into loud lauhter and Mary
Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became
still more attractive to them. Returnin from the yard, the doctor told
his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him in
alarm, awaitin her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must o
to sleep in their covered cart, or everythin in it would be stolen.

"But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an idea,
doctor!"

"I'll stand uard on it myself!" said Ilyin.

"No, entlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for two
nihts," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,
waitin for the ame to end.

Seein his loomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers rew
still merrier, and some of them could not refrain from lauhter, for
which they hurriedly souht plausible pretexts. When he had one, takin
his wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,
the officers lay down in the tavern, coverin themselves with their wet
cloaks, but they did not sleep for a lon time; now they exchaned
remarks, recallin the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's deliht, now
they ran out into the porch and reported what was takin place in the
covered trap. Several times Rostov, coverin his head, tried to o to
sleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would be
resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasonin, merry, childlike lauhter.




CHAPTER XIV

It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when the
quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town of
Ostrovna. Still lauhin and talkin, the officers bean hurriedly
ettin ready and aain boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But
Rostov went off to his squadron without waitin for tea. Day was
breakin, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersin. It felt
damp and cold, especially in clothes that were still moist. As they left
the tavern in the twiliht of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin both lanced
under the wet and listenin leather hood of the doctor's cart, from
under the apron of which his feet were stickin out, and in the middle
of which his wife's nihtcap was visible and her sleepy breathin
audible.

"She really is a dear little thin," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was
followin him.

"A charmin woman!" said Ilyin, with all the ravity of a boy of
sixteen.

Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command
was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.
Rostov ridin in front ave the order "Forward!" and the hussars, with
clankin sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs splashin in the
mud, defiled in fours and moved alon the broad road planted with birch
trees on each side, followin the infantry and a battery that had one
on in front.

Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddenin in the east, were scuddin
before the wind. It was rowin lihter and lihter. That curly rass
which always rows by country roadsides became clearly visible, still
wet with the niht's rain; the droopin branches of the birches, also
wet, swayed in the wind and flun down briht drops of water to one
side. The soldiers' faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostov,
always closely followed by Ilyin, rode alon the side of the road
between two rows of birch trees.

When campainin, Rostov allowed himself the indulence of ridin not a
reimental but a Cossack horse. A jude of horses and a sportsman, he
had lately procured himself a lare, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse,
dun-colored, with liht mane and tail, and when he rode it no one could
outallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thouht
of the horse, of the mornin, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the
impendin daner.

Formerly, when oin into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had not
the least feelin of fear. He was fearless, not because he had rown
used to bein under fire (one cannot row used to daner), but because
he had learned how to manae his thouhts when in daner. He had rown
accustomed when oin into action to think about anythin but what would
seem most likely to interest him--the impendin daner. Durin the first
period of his service, hard as he tried and much as he reproached
himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, but with time
it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees,
occasionally pluckin leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes
touchin his horse's side with his foot, or, without turnin round,
handin a pipe he had finished to an hussar ridin behind him, with as
calm and careless an air as thouh he were merely out for a ride. He
lanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and in
reat aitation. He knew from experience the tormentin expectation of
terror and death the cornet was sufferin and knew that only time could
help him.

As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,
the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer mornin
after the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and
all was still. The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared
behind a lon narrow cloud that hun above it. A few minutes later it
reappeared brihter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearin its
ede. Everythin rew briht and littered. And with that liht, and as
if in reply to it, came the sound of uns ahead of them.

Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of
that firin, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came allopin from
Vitebsk with orders to advance at a trot alon the road.

The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which had
also quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passin throuh an
empty and deserted villae aain ascended. The horses bean to lather
and the men to flush.

"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the reimental commander was
heard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order from in
front.

And the hussars, passin alon the line of troops on the left flank of
our position, halted behind our uhlans who were in the front line. To
the riht stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.
Hiher up the hill, on the very horizon, our uns were visible throuh
the wonderfully clear air, brihtly illuminated by slantin mornin
sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy's
columns and uns. Our advanced line, already in action, could be heard
briskly exchanin shots with the enemy in the dale.

At these sounds, lon unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains
of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now toether,
now several quickly one after another. Aain all was silent and then
aain it sounded as if someone were walkin on detonators and explodin
them.

The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonade
bean. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,
halted, spoke to the commander of the reiment, and rode up the hill to
the uns.

After Ostermann had one, a command ran out to the uhlans.

"Form column! Prepare to chare!"

The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalry
to pass. The uhlans started, the streamers on their spears flutterin,
and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
the left.

As soon as the uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up
the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the
uhlans, bullets came from the front, whinin and whistlin, but fell
spent without takin effect.

The sounds, which he had not heard for so lon, had an even more
pleasurable and exhilaratin effect on Rostov than the previous sounds
of firin. Drawin himself up, he viewed the field of battle openin out
before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the movement
of the uhlans. They swooped down close to the French draoons, somethin
confused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later our
uhlans were allopin back, not to the place they had occupied but more
to the left, and amon the orane-colored uhlans on chestnut horses and
behind them, in a lare roup, blue French draoons on ray horses could
be seen.




CHAPTER XV

Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catch
siht of these blue French draoons pursuin our uhlans. Nearer and
nearer in disorderly crowds came the uhlans and the French draoons
pursuin them. He could already see how these men, who looked so small
at the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, wavin their
arms and their sabers in the air.

Rostov azed at what was happenin before him as at a hunt. He felt
instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French draoons now, the
latter could not withstand them, but if a chare was to be made it must
be done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late. He looked
around. A captain, standin beside him, was azin like himself with
eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.

"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them...."

"A fine thin too!" replied the captain, "and really..."

Rostov, without waitin to hear him out, touched his horse, alloped to
the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish ivin the
word of command, the whole squadron, sharin his feelin, was followin
him. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he
did when huntin, without reflectin or considerin. He saw the draoons
near and that they were allopin in disorder; he knew they could not
withstand an attack--knew there was only that moment and that if he let
it slip it would not return. The bullets were whinin and whistlin so
stimulatinly around him and his horse was so eaer to o that he could
not restrain himself. He touched his horse, ave the word of command,
and immediately, hearin behind him the tramp of the horses of his
deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the draoons.
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace
instinctively chaned to a allop, which rew faster and faster as they
drew nearer to our uhlans and the French draoons who alloped after
them. The draoons were now close at hand. On seein the hussars, the
foremost bean to turn, while those behind bean to halt. With the same
feelin with which he had alloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov
ave rein to his Donets horse and alloped to intersect the path of the
draoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot
flun himself to the round to avoid bein knocked over, and a riderless
horse fell in amon the hussars. Nearly all the French draoons were
allopin back. Rostov, pickin out one on a ray horse, dashed after
him. On the way he came upon a bush, his allant horse cleared it, and
almost before he had rihted himself in his saddle he saw that he would
immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman, by his
uniform an officer, was oin at a allop, crouchin on his ray horse
and urin it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashed
its breast aainst the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almost
knockin it over, and at the same instant Rostov, without knowin why,
raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it.

The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. The
officer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slihtly cut his
arm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from friht.
Rostov reined in his horse, and his eyes souht his foe to see whom he
had vanquished. The French draoon officer was hoppin with one foot on
the round, the other bein cauht in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed up
with fear as if he every moment expected another blow, azed up at
Rostov with shrinkin terror. His pale and mud-stained face--fair and
youn, with a dimple in the chin and liht-blue eyes--was not an enemy's
face at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.
Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I
surrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to et his foot out of the
stirrup and did not remove his frihtened blue eyes from Rostov's face.
Some hussars who alloped up disenaed his foot and helped him into the
saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the draoons; one was
wounded, but thouh his face was bleedin, he would not ive up his
horse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;
a third was bein helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the
French infantry were firin as they ran. The hussars alloped hastily
back with their prisoners. Rostov alloped back with the rest, aware of
an unpleasant feelin of depression in his heart. Somethin vaue and
confused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him with
the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.

Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returnin hussars, sent for Rostov,
thanked him, and said he would report his allant deed to the Emperor
and would recommend him for a St. eore's Cross. When sent for by Count
Ostermann, Rostov, rememberin that he had chared without orders, felt
sure his commander was sendin for him to punish him for breach of
discipline. Ostermann's flatterin words and promise of a reward should
therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still felt
that same vauely disareeable feelin of moral nausea. "But what on
earth is worryin me?" he asked himself as he rode back from the
eneral. "Ilyin? No, he's safe. Have I disraced myself in any way? No,
that's not it." Somethin else, resemblin remorse, tormented him. "Yes,
oh yes, that French officer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm
paused when I raised it."

Rostov saw the prisoners bein led away and alloped after them to have
a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sittin in
his forein uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about
him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. He
lanced at Rostov with a feined smile and waved his hand in reetin.
Rostov still had the same indefinite feelin, as of shame.

All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov,
without bein dull or anry, was silent, thouhtful, and preoccupied. He
drank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turnin somethin
over in his mind.

Rostov was always thinkin about that brilliant exploit of his, which to
his amazement had ained him the St. eore's Cross and even iven him a
reputation for bravery, and there was somethin he could not at all
understand. "So others are even more afraid than I am!" he thouht. "So
that's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for my
country's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?
And how frihtened he was! He thouht that I should kill him. Why should
I kill him? My hand trembled. And they have iven me a St. eore's
Cross.... I can't make it out at all."

But while Nicholas was considerin these questions and still could reach
no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the
service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at
Ostrovna he was brouht into notice, received command of an hussar
battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.




CHAPTER XVI

On receivin news of Natasha's illness, the countess, thouh not quite
well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the
household, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house to
their own and settled down in town.

Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for her
parents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness, her
conduct and the breakin off of her enaement, receded into the
backround. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider
in how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat or
sleep, rew visibly thinner, couhed, and, as the doctors made them
feel, was in daner. They could not think of anythin but how to help
her. Doctors came to see her sinly and in consultation, talked much in
French, erman, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a reat
variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them, but the simple
idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease
Natasha was sufferin from, as no disease suffered by a live man can be
known, for every livin person has his own peculiarities and always has
his own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to
medicine--not a disease of the luns, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and so
on mentioned in medical books, but a disease consistin of one of the
innumerable combinations of the maladies of those orans. This simple
thouht could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard
that he is unable to work his charms) because the business of their
lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best
years of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thouht was
kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were really
useful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family. Their
usefulness did not depend on makin the patient swallow substances for
the most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they were
iven in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, and
indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of
those who loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,
pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths. They satisfied
that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and that
somethin should be done, which is felt by those who are sufferin. They
satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when it
wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the achin
spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child
cannot believe that the stronest and wisest of its people have no
remedy for its pain, and the hope of relief and the expression of its
mother's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. The doctors were
of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assurin her
that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in
the Arbat and ot a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble
and seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at
intervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.

What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would they
have looked, if nothin had been done, if there had not been those pills
to ive by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all the
other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carryin out of which
supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would
the count have borne his dearly loved dauhter's illness had he not
known that it was costin him a thousand rubles, and that he would not
rude thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if her
illness continued he would not rude yet other thousands and would take
her abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explain
the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,
but Frise had, and Mudrov had dianosed them even better? What would the
countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid
for not strictly obeyin the doctor's orders?

"You'll never et well like that," she would say, forettin her rief
in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine at
the riht time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn to
pneumonia," she would o on, derivin much comfort from the utterance of
that forein word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.

What would Sonya have done without the lad consciousness that she had
not undressed durin the first three nihts, in order to be ready to
carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and that she
still kept awake at niht so as not to miss the proper time when the
slihtly harmful pills in the little ilt box had to be administered?
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices
were bein made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicine
at certain hours, thouh she declared that no medicine would cure her
and that it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able to
show, by disreardin the orders, that she did not believe in medical
treatment and did not value her life.

The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tonue, and
reardless of her rief-stricken face joked with her. But when he had
one into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he
assumed a rave air and thouhtfully shakin his head said that thouh
there was daner, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and
one must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly mental, but... And
the countess, tryin to conceal the action from herself and from him,
slipped a old coin into his hand and always returned to the patient
with a more tranquil mind.

The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, slept
little, couhed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that she
could not et on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the
stiflin atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to the
country that summer of 1812.

In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out
of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of
such thins made a lare collection, and in spite of bein deprived of
the country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha's
rief bean to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceased
to press so painfully on her heart, it radually faded into the past,
and she bean to recover physically.




CHAPTER XVII

Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external
forms of pleasure--balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters--but she
never lauhed without a sound of tears in her lauhter. She could not
sin. As soon as she bean to lauh, or tried to sin by herself, tears
choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection of those pure
times which could never return, tears of vexation that she should so
uselessly have ruined her youn life which miht have been so happy.
Lauhter and sinin in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy, in
face of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish to
coquet ever entered her head. She said and felt at that time that no man
was more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Somethin stood
sentinel within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost all
the old interests of her carefree irlish life that had been so full of
hope. The previous autumn, the huntin, "Uncle," and the Christmas
holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest
and most painfully. What would she not have iven to brin back even a
sinle day of that time! But it was one forever. Her presentiment at
the time had not deceived her--that that state of freedom and readiness
for any enjoyment would not return aain. Yet it was necessary to live
on.

It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerly
imained, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. But
this was not enouh. She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?" But
there was nothin to come. There was no joy in life, yet life was
passin. Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to
anyone, but wanted nothin for herself. She kept away from everyone in
the house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya. She liked to be
with him better than with the others, and when alone with him she
sometimes lauhed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who came
to see them was lad to see only one person, Pierre. It would have been
impossible to treat her with more delicacy, reater care, and at the
same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciously
felt this delicacy and so found reat pleasure in his society. But she
was not even rateful to him for it; nothin ood on Pierre's part
seemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind
to everyone that there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha
noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,
especially when he wanted to do somethin to please her, or feared that
somethin they spoke of would awaken memories distressin to her. She
noticed this and attributed it to his eneral kindness and shyness,
which she imained must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.
After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would have asked
on his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment when she was
so stronly aitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelins; and
it seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comforted
her, were spoken as all sorts of meaninless words are spoken to comfort
a cryin child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but because
Natasha felt very stronly with him that moral barrier the absence of
which she had experienced with Kurain that it never entered her head
that the relations between him and herself could lead to love on her
part, still less on his, or even to the kind of tender, self-conscious,
romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had known
several instances.

Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Arafena Ivanovna Belova, a
country neihbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions at
the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suested that Natasha should fast
and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha ladly welcomed the idea.
Despite the doctor's orders that she should not o out early in the
mornin, Natasha insisted on fastin and preparin for the sacrament,
not as they enerally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attendin
three services in their own house, but as Arafena Ivanovna did, by
oin to church every day for a week and not once missin Vespers,
Matins, or Mass.

The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results of
the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayer
miht help her dauhter more than medicines and, thouh not without fear
and concealin it from the doctor, she areed to Natasha's wish and
entrusted her to Belova. Arafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha
at three in the mornin, but enerally found her already awake. She was
afraid of bein late for Matins. Hastily washin, and meekly puttin on
her shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natasha, shiverin in the fresh
air, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear liht of dawn.
By Arafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own
parish, but at a church where, accordin to the devout Arafena
Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were
never many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in
the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virin, let into the
screen before the choir on the left side, and a feelin, new to her, of
humility before somethin reat and incomprehensible, seized her when at
that unusual mornin hour, azin at the dark face of the Virin
illuminated by the candles burnin before it and by the mornin liht
fallin from the window, she listened to the words of the service which
she tried to follow with understandin. When she understood them her
personal feelin became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its
own. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that the
wish to understand everythin is pride, that it is impossible to
understand all, that it is only necessary to believe and to commit
oneself to od, whom she felt uidin her soul at those moments. She
crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand, in horror
at her own vileness, simply asked od to forive her everythin,
everythin, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrendered
herself most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at an
early hour when she met no one but bricklayers oin to work or men
sweepin the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,
Natasha experienced a feelin new to her, a sense of the possibility of
correctin her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of
happiness.

Durin the whole week she spent in this way, that feelin rew every
day. And the happiness of takin communion, or "communin" as Arafena
Ivanovna, joyously playin with the word, called it, seemed to Natasha
so reat that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.

But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in
white muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time for
many months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thouht of the life
that lay before her.

The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue the
powders he had prescribed a fortniht previously.

"She must certainly o on takin them mornin and evenin," said he,
evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be
particular about it.

"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the old
coin in his palm. "She will soon be sinin and frolickin about. The
last medicine has done her a very reat deal of ood. She has freshened
up very much."

The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her
nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawin room.




CHAPTER XVIII

At the beinnin of July more and more disquietin reports about the war
bean to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to
the people, and of his comin himself from the army to Moscow. And as up
to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,
exaerated reports became current about them and about the position of
Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leavin the army because it was
in daner, it was said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Napoleon had
an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.

On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received
but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised
to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and brin a copy of the manifesto
and appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.

That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapel
as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs
ot out of their carriae at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of
hawkers, the liht and ay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves
of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white
trousers of a battalion marchin to parade, the rattlin of wheels on
the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of that
summer lanuor, that content and discontent with the present, which is
most stronly felt on a briht, hot day in town. All the Moscow
notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis'
chapel, for, as if expectin somethin to happen, many wealthy families
who usually left town for their country estates had not one away that
summer. As Natasha, at her mother's side, passed throuh the crowd
behind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard a
youn man speakin about her in too loud a whisper.

"That's Rostova, the one who..."

"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"

She heard, or thouht she heard, the names of Kurain and Bolkonski. But
she was always imainin that. It always seemed to her that everyone who
looked at her was thinkin only of what had happened to her. With a
sinkin heart, wretched as she always was now when she found herself in
a crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked-
-as women can walk--with the more repose and stateliness the reater the
pain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain that she was pretty,
but this no loner ave her satisfaction as it used to. On the contrary
it tormented her more than anythin else of late, and particularly so on
this briht, hot summer day in town. "It's Sunday aain--another week
past," she thouht, recallin that she had been here the Sunday before,
"and always the same life that is no life, and the same surroundins in
which it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty, I'm youn, and I know
that now I am ood. I used to be bad, but now I know I am ood," she
thouht, "but yet my best years are slippin by and are no ood to
anyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchaned nods with
acquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies' dresses,
condemned the bearin of a lady standin close by who was not crossin
herself properly but in a cramped manner, and aain she thouht with
vexation that she was herself bein juded and was judin others, and
suddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her own
vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was aain lost to
her.

A comely, fresh-lookin old man was conductin the service with that
mild solemnity which has so elevatin and soothin an effect on the
souls of the worshipers. The ates of the sanctuary screen were closed,
the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice
pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not
understand, made Natasha's breast heave, and a joyous but oppressive
feelin aitated her.

"Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may row ood
forever, forever!" she pleaded.

The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and,
holdin his thumb extended, drew his lon hair from under his dalmatic
and, makin the sin of the cross on his breast, bean in a loud and
solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer...

"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."

"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, united
by brotherly love--let us pray!" thouht Natasha.

"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls."

"For the world of anels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayed
Natasha.

When they prayed for the warriors, she thouht of her brother and
Denisov. When they prayed for all travelin by land and sea, she
remembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked od to forive her
all the wrons she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,
she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and mother and
Sonya, realizin for the first time how wronly she had acted toward
them, and feelin all the strenth of her love for them. When they
prayed for those who hate us, she tried to think of her enemies and
people who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included amon her
enemies the creditors and all who had business dealins with her father,
and always at the thouht of enemies and those who hated her she
remembered Anatole who had done her so much harm--and thouh he did not
hate her she ladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer did
she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,
as men for whom her feelins were as nothin compared with her awe and
devotion to od. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod,
she bowed very low and made the sin of the cross, sayin to herself
that even if she did not understand, still she could not doubt, and at
any rate loved the overnin Synod and prayed for it.

When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over his
breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christ
the Lord!"

"Commit ourselves to od," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord od, I
submit myself to Thy will!" she thouht. "I want nothin, wish for
nothin; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take me!"
prayed Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossin
herself but lettin her slender arms han down as if expectin some
invisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,
from her rerets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.

The countess looked round several times at her dauhter's softened face
and shinin eyes and prayed od to help her.

Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual order
Natasha knew so well, the deacon brouht out a small stool, the one he
knelt on when prayin on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doors
of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet
biretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort.
Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another in
surprise. Then came the prayer just received from the Synod--a prayer
for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.

"Lord od of miht, od of our salvation!" bean the priest in that
voice, clear, not randiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clery
read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.

"Lord od of miht, od of our salvation! Look this day in mercy and
blessin on Thy humble people, and raciously hear us, spare us, and
have mercy upon us! This foe confoundin Thy land, desirin to lay waste
the whole world, rises aainst us; these lawless men are athered
toether to overthrow Thy kindom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy
beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to
desecrate our holy shrines. How lon, O Lord, how lon shall the wicked
triumph? How lon shall they wield unlawful power?

"Lord od! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strenthen with Thy miht our
most racious soverein lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; be
mindful of his uprihtness and meekness, reward him accordin to his
rihteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his
counsels, his undertakins, and his work; strenthen his kindom by
Thine almihty hand, and ive him victory over his enemy, even as Thou
avest Moses the victory over Amalek, ideon over Midian, and David over
oliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those who
have armed themselves in Thy Name, and ird their loins with strenth
for the fiht. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;
confound and put to shame those who have devised evil aainst us, may
they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before the
wind, and may Thy mihty Anel confound them and put them to fliht; may
they be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laid
in secret be turned aainst them; let them fall before Thy servants'
feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both
reat and small; Thou art od, and man cannot prevail aainst Thee!

"od of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and lovin-kindness
which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be racious to our
unworthiness, and in Thy reat oodness and Thy many mercies reard not
our transressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renew
a riht spirit within us, strenthen us all in Thy faith, fortify our
hope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unity of
spirit in the rihteous defense of the heritae Thou avest to us and to
our fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted aainst
the destiny of those Thou hast sanctified.

"O Lord our od, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let us
not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and ive us a token of Thy
blessin, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it and
be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art
the Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,
and rant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice
in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath
the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,
and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be all
lory, to Father, Son, and Holy host, now and forever, world without
end. Amen."

In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected her
stronly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
Amalek, of ideon over Midian, and of David over oliath, and about the
destruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to od with the
tenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowin, but without
fully understandin what she was askin of od in that prayer. She
shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of rihteousness,
for the strenthenin of the heart by faith and hope, and its animation
by love. But she could not pray that her enemies miht be trampled under
foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishin she had more of
them that she miht pray for them. But neither could she doubt the
rihteousness of the prayer that was bein read on bended knees. She
felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thouht of the
punishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her own
sins, and she prayed to od to forive them all, and her too, and to
ive them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to her
that od heard her prayer.




CHAPTER XIX

From the day when Pierre, after leavin the Rostovs' with Natasha's
rateful look fresh in his mind, had azed at the comet that seemed to
be fixed in the sky and felt that somethin new was appearin on his own
horizon--from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of all
earthly thins, that had incessantly tormented him, no loner presented
itself. That terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him
amid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a
reply to the former question, but by her imae. When he listened to, or
himself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of
human baseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did not
ask himself why men struled so about these thins when all is so
transient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had last
seen her, and all his doubts vanished--not because she had answered the
questions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her
transferred him instantly to another, a brihter, realm of spiritual
activity in which no one could be justified or uilty--a realm of beauty
and love which it was worth livin for. Whatever worldly baseness
presented itself to him, he said to himself:

"Well, supposin N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the
country and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? She
smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come aain, and I love her, and
no one will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.

Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle and
dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs'
there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and
acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him alon
irresistibly. But latterly, when more and more disquietin reports came
from the seat of war and Natasha's health bean to improve and she no
loner aroused in him the former feelin of careful pity, an ever-
increasin restlessness, which he could not explain, took possession of
him. He felt that the condition he was in could not continue lon, that
a catastrophe was comin which would chane his whole life, and he
impatiently souht everywhere for sins of that approachin catastrophe.
One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the followin prophecy
concernin Napoleon, drawn from the Revelation of St. John.

In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:

Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understandin count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred
threescore and six.

And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:

And there was iven unto him a mouth speakin reat thins and
blasphemies; and power was iven unto him to continue forty and two
months.

The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as the
Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the others
tens, will have the followin sinificance:


a   b   c   d   e   f      h   i   k 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
10 l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s 20   30   40   50   60   70   80
90 t    u    v    w    x    y 100  110  120  130  140  150 z 160

Writin the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that the
sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretold
in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applyin the same system to the words
quarante-deux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that "spoke
reat thins and blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained; from
which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come in
the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two. This prophecy
pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an
end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by the
same system of usin letters as numbers and addin them up, to find an
answer to the question that enrossed him. He wrote the words L'Empereur
Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums were
either more or less than 666. Once when makin such calculations he
wrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the sum
of the numbers did not come riht. Then he chaned the spellin,
substitutin a z for the s and addin de and the article le, still
without obtainin the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if the
answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality would
also be iven in the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and addin up
the numbers ot 671. This was only five too much, and five was
represented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before the
word Empereur. By omittin the e, thouh incorrectly, Pierre ot the
answer he souht. L'russe Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him.
How, or by what means, he was connected with the reat event foretold in
the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection for
a moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
comet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof--all this had to
mature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere
of Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to a
reat achievement and reat happiness.


* Forty-two.

On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre had
promised the Rostovs to brin them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knew
well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In the
mornin, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier
fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at
Moscow balls.

"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of somethin!" said the
courier. "I have a sackful of letters to parents."

Amon these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father. Pierre
took that letter, and Rostopchin also ave him the Emperor's appeal to
Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own
most recent bulletin. lancin throuh the army orders, Pierre found in
one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of
Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St. eore's Cross of the Fourth Class for
courae shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in the same order the name of
Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the command of a reiment of
Chasseurs. Thouh he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski,
Pierre could not refrain from makin them happy by the news of their
son's havin received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order
and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keepin the appeal, the bulletin,
and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.

His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone of anxious
hurry, the meetin with the courier who talked casually of how badly
thins were oin in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies in
Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation statin that Napoleon promised to
be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the
Emperor's bein expected to arrive next day--all aroused with fresh
force that feelin of aitation and expectation in Pierre which he had
been conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet, and especially
since the beinnin of the war.

He had lon been thinkin of enterin the army and would have done so
had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society of
Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetual
peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when he
saw the reat mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talkin
patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chief
reason for not carryin out his intention to enter the army lay in the
vaue idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,
666; that his part in the reat affair of settin a limit to the power
of the beast that spoke reat and blasphemous thins had been
predestined from eternity, and that therefore he ouht not to undertake
anythin, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.




CHAPTER XX

A few intimate friends were dinin with the Rostovs that day, as usual
on Sundays.

Pierre came early so as to find them alone.

He had rown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he
not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so stron that he carried his
bulk with evident ease.

He went up the stairs, puffin and mutterin somethin. His coachman did
not even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was at
the Rostovs' he stayed till midniht. The Rostovs' footman rushed
eaerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat and
stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in the
anteroom.

The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he saw
her, while takin off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicin solfa
exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sun since her
illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delihted him. He
opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at
church, walkin about the room sinin. She had her back to him when he
opened the door, but when, turnin quickly, she saw his broad, surprised
face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.

"I want to try to sin aain," she said, addin as if by way of excuse,
"it is, at least, somethin to do."

"That's capital!"

"How lad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the old
animation Pierre had not seen in her for a lon time. "You know Nicholas
has received a St. eore's Cross? I am so proud of him."

"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt you,"
he added, and was about to o to the drawin room.

Natasha stopped him.

"Count, is it wron of me to sin?" she said blushin, and fixin her
eyes inquirinly on him.

"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"

"I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not like
to do anythin you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You
don't know how important you are to me, how much you've done for me...."
She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "I
saw in that same army order that he, Bolkonski" (she whispered the name
hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army aain. What do you think?"--she
was speakin hurriedly, evidently afraid her strenth miht fail her--
"Will he ever forive me? Will he not always have a bitter feelin
toward me? What do you think? What do you think?"

"I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothin to forive.... If I
were in his place..."

By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day
when, tryin to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself but
the best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for her
hand; and the same feelin of pity, tenderness, and love took possession
of him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not ive him
time to say them.

"Yes, you... you..." she said, utterin the word you rapturously--
"that's a different thin. I know no one kinder, more enerous, or
better than you; nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and now
too, I don't know what would have become of me, because..."

Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her music
before her eyes, bean sinin aain, and aain bean walkin up and
down the room.

Just then Petya came runnin in from the drawin room.

Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and
resembled Natasha. He was preparin to enter the university, but he and
his friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, areed to join the hussars.

Petya had come rushin out to talk to his namesake about this affair. He
had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in the
hussars.

Pierre walked up and down the drawin room, not listenin to what Petya
was sayin.

Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.

"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are my
only hope," said Petya.

"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll brin it
all up today."

"Well, mon cher, have you ot the manifesto?" asked the old count. "The
countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer.
She says it's very fine."

"Yes, I've ot it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow...
there's to be an Extraordinary Meetin of the nobility, and they are
talkin of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me conratulate
you!"

"Yes, yes, thank od! Well, and what news from the army?"

"We are aain retreatin. They say we're already near Smolensk," replied
Pierre.

"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"

"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"

Pierre bean feelin in his pockets for the papers, but could not find
them. Still slappin his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess who
entered the room and lanced uneasily around, evidently expectin
Natasha, who had left off sinin but had not yet come into the drawin
room.

"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.

"There he is, always losin everythin!" remarked the countess.

Natasha entered with a softened and aitated expression of face and sat
down lookin silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre's
features, which had been loomy, suddenly lihted up, and while still
searchin for the papers he lanced at her several times.

"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll
certainly..."

"But you'll be late for dinner."

"Oh! And my coachman has one."

But Sonya, who had one to look for the papers in the anteroom, had
found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under the
linin. Pierre was about to bein readin.

"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expectin much
enjoyment from that readin.

At dinner, at which champane was drunk to the health of the new
chevalier of St. eore, Shinshin told them the town news, of the
illness of the old eorian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from
Moscow, and of how some erman fellow had been brouht to Rostopchin and
accused of bein a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told the
story), and how Rostopchin let him o and assured the people that he was
"not a spire at all, but only an old erman ruin."

"People are bein arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countess
she should not speak French so much. It's not the time for it now."

"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince olitsyn has enaed a
master to teach him Russian. It is becomin danerous to speak French in
the streets."

"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia,
you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressin
Pierre.

Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all throuh dinner, seemin not
to rasp what was said. He looked at the count.

"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And
yet everythin is so strane, so strane! I can't make it out. I don't
know, I am very far from havin military tastes, but in these times no
one can answer for himself."

After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and
with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader,
to read the appeal.

"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!

"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. He
comes to despoil our beloved country."

Sonya read painstakinly in her hih-pitched voice. The count listened
with closed eyes, heavin abrupt sihs at certain passaes.

Natasha sat erect, azin with a searchin look now at her father and
now at Pierre.

Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countess
shook her head disapprovinly and anrily at every solemn expression in
the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the daner
threatenin her son would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcastic
smile on his lips, was evidently preparin to make fun of anythin that
ave him the opportunity: Sonya's readin, any remark of the count's, or
even the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.

After readin about the daners that threatened Russia, the hopes the
Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,
Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that was
bein paid to her, read the last words:

"We ourselves will not delay to appear amon our people in that Capital
and in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the direction
of all our levies, both those now barrin the enemy's path and those
freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin he
hopes to brin upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe delivered
from bondae lorify the name of Russia!"

"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, openin his moist eyes and sniffin
repeatedly, as if a stron vinairette had been held to his nose; and he
added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice everythin
and berude nothin."

Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on the
count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to her
father.

"What a darlin our Papa is!" she cried, kissin him, and she aain
looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her
with her better spirits.

"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.

"Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injured
tone. "Everythin seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke...."

"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and we'll
all o.... We're not ermans!"

"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.

"Never mind what it's for...."

At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was payin any attention, came up
to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breakin voice
that was now deep and now shrill:

"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as you please,
but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I
can't... that's all...."

The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, and
turned anrily to her husband.

"That comes of your talkin!" said she.

But the count had already recovered from his excitement.

"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must
study."

"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is youner than I, and he's
oin too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petya
stopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still ot out the words,
"when our Fatherland is in daner."

"That'll do, that'll do--nonsense...."

"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everythin."

"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a lance at his
wife, who had turned pale and was starin fixedly at her son.

"And I tell you--Peter Kirilych here will also tell you..."

"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lips
and you want to o into the army! There, there, I tell you," and the
count moved to o out of the room, takin the papers, probably to reread
them in his study before havin a nap.

"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's o and have a smoke," he said.

Pierre was aitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,
continually lancin at him with a more than cordial look, had reduced
him to this condition.

"No, I think I'll o home."

"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evenin with us.... You don't often
come nowadays as it is, and this irl of mine," said the count ood-
naturedly, pointin to Natasha, "only brihtens up when you're here."

"Yes, I had forotten... I really must o home... business..." said
Pierre hurriedly.

"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.

"Why are you oin? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she looked
challeninly into Pierre's eyes.

"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,
and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.

"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply
I have business...."

"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha bean resolutely and suddenly stopped.

They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried
to smile but could not: his smile expressed sufferin, and he silently
kissed her hand and went out.

Pierre made up his mind not to o to the Rostovs' any more.




CHAPTER XXI

After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room and
there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,
silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not to
notice anythin.

Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'
domestic serfs beed permission to o to have a look at him. That
mornin Petya was a lon time dressin and arranin his hair and collar
to look like a rown-up man. He frowned before his lookin lass,
esticulated, shrued his shoulders, and finally, without sayin a word
to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back door, tryin to
avoid notice. Petya decided to o straiht to where the Emperor was and
to explain frankly to some entleman-in-waitin (he imained the Emperor
to be always surrounded by entlemen-in-waitin) that he, Count Rostov,
in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could be
no hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to... While dressin,
Petya had prepared many fine thins he meant to say to the entleman-in-
waitin.

It was on the very fact of bein so youn that Petya counted for success
in reachin the Emperor--he even thouht how surprised everyone would be
at his youthfulness--and yet in the arranement of his collar and hair
and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a rown-up man.
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the
ever-increasin crowds movin toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered
to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man. As he approached
the Kremlin he even bean to avoid bein crushed and resolutely stuck
out his elbows in a menacin way. But within the Trinity ateway he was
so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the
patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his
determination he had to ive in, and stop while carriaes passed in,
rumblin beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a
footman, two tradesmen, and a dischared soldier. After standin some
time in the ateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the others
without waitin for all the carriaes to pass, and he bean resolutely
workin his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, who
was the first aainst whom he directed his efforts, anrily shouted at
him:

"What are you shovin for, youn lordlin? Don't you see we're all
standin still? Then why push?"

"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also bean workin his elbows
to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of the
ateway.

Petya wiped his perspirin face with his hands and pulled up the damp
collar which he had arraned so well at home to seem like a man's.

He felt that he no loner looked presentable, and feared that if he were
now to approach the entlemen-in-waitin in that pliht he would not be
admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up or
move to another place, because of the crowd. One of the enerals who
drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', and Petya thouht of
askin his help, but came to the conclusion that that would not be a
manly thin to do. When the carriaes had all passed in, the crowd,
carryin Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which
was already full of people. There were people not only in the square,
but everywhere--on the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Petya found
himself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyous
voices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.

For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared,
and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was bein pressed so
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah!
hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see
nothin except the people about him.

All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. A
tradesman's wife standin beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down
her cheeks.

"Father! Anel! Dear one!" she kept repeatin, wipin away her tears
with her finers.

"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.

For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rush
forward.

Quite beside himself, Petya, clinchin his teeth and rollin his eyes
ferociously, pushed forward, elbowin his way and shoutin "hurrah!" as
if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, but
on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushed
forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"

"So this is what the Emperor is!" thouht Petya. "No, I can't petition
him myself--that would be too bold." But in spite of this he continued
to strule desperately forward, and from between the backs of those in
front he cauht limpses of an open space with a strip of red cloth
spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed back--the police in
front were pushin back those who had pressed too close to the
procession: the Emperor was passin from the palace to the Cathedral of
the Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his side
and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everythin rew dim
before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to himself, a
man of clerical appearance with a tuft of ray hair at the back of his
head and wearin a shabby blue cassock--probably a church clerk and
chanter--was holdin him under the arm with one hand while wardin off
the pressure of the crowd with the other.

"You've crushed the youn entleman!" said the clerk. "What are you up
to? ently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"

The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread
out aain more evenly, and the clerk led Petya--pale and breathless--to
the Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly a
crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearest
him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised
platform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they miht
be) who had crushed him.

"One miht easily et killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killin
people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"--various voices were heard
sayin.

Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had
passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained
a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who would
be returnin that way. Petya no loner thouht of presentin his
petition. If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy!

While the service was proceedin in the Cathedral of the Assumption--it
was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's
arrival and of thanksivin for the conclusion of peace with the Turks--
the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, sellin kvas,
inerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was particularly
fond), and ordinary conversation could aain be heard. A tradesman's
wife was showin a rent in her shawl and tellin how much the shawl had
cost; another was sayin that all silk oods had now ot dear. The clerk
who had rescued Petya was talkin to a functionary about the priests who
were officiatin that day with the bishop. The clerk several times used
the word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya did not understand.
Two youn citizens were jokin with some serf irls who were crackin
nuts. All these conversations, especially the jokin with the irls,
were such as miht have had a particular charm for Petya at his ae, but
they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation--the pedestal of
the cannon--still aitated as before by the thouht of the Emperor and
by his love for him. The feelin of pain and fear he had experienced
when he was bein crushed, toether with that of rapture, still further
intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion.

Suddenly the sound of a firin of cannon was heard from the embankment,
to celebrate the sinin of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushed
impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firin. Petya too would
have run there, but the clerk who had taken the youn entleman under
his protection stopped him. The firin was still proceedin when
officers, enerals, and entlemen-in-waitin came runnin out of the
cathedral, and after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps were
aain raised, and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back
aain. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emered from the
cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd aain.

"Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those around
him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Petya,
fixin on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for the
tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm on
him--thouh it happened not to be the Emperor--frantically shouted
"Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what miht, he would join the
army.

The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and bean
to disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anythin and
was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not o home but stood with
that diminishin, but still considerable, crowd before the palace while
the Emperor dined--lookin in at the palace windows, expectin he knew
not what, and envyin alike the notables he saw arrivin at the entrance
to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,
limpses of whom could be seen throuh the windows.

While the Emperor was dinin, Valuev, lookin out of the window, said:

"The people are still hopin to see Your Majesty aain."

The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munchin a biscuit, rose
and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya amon them, rushed
toward the balcony.

"Anel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya with
it, and aain the women and men of weaker mold, Petya amon them, wept
with joy.

A larish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holdin in his hand broke
off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the round. A coachman in
a jerkin, who stood nearest, spran forward and snatched it up. Several
people in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seein this the Emperor had
a plateful of biscuits brouht him and bean throwin them down from the
balcony. Petya's eyes rew bloodshot, and still more excited by the
daner of bein crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why,
but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that he
must not ive way. He spran forward and upset an old woman who was
catchin at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeated
thouh she was lyin on the round--she rabbed at some biscuits but her
hand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee,
seized a biscuit, and as if fearin to be too late, aain shouted
"Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.

The Emperor went in, and after that the reater part of the crowd bean
to disperse.

"There! I said if only we waited--and so it was!" was bein joyfully
said by various people.

Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at havin to o home knowin that all
the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not o straiht home from the
Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was
also enterin the reiment. On returnin home Petya announced resolutely
and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would run
away. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--thouh he had not yet quite
yielded--went to inquire how he could arrane for Petya to serve where
there would be least daner.




CHAPTER XXII

Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriaes
were standin outside the Sloboda Palace.

The reat halls were full. In the first were the nobility and entry in
their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats of
blue cloth and wearin medals. In the noblemen's hall there was an
incessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief manates sat on hih-
backed chairs at a lare table under the portrait of the Emperor, but
most of the entry were strollin about the room.

All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the club or in their own
houses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day, others in that
of Emperor Paul, others aain in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or
the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the eneral characteristic of
bein in uniform imparted somethin strane and fantastic to these
diverse and familiar personalities, both old and youn. The old men,
dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and bloated, or aunt and wrinkled,
were especially strikin. For the most part they sat quietly in their
places and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked, attached
themselves to someone youner. On all these faces, as on the faces of
the crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a strikin
contradiction: the eneral expectation of a solemn event, and at the
same time the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook,
Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.

Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early mornin in a nobleman's
uniform that had become too tiht for him. He was aitated; this
extraordinary atherin not only of nobles but also of the merchant-
class--les etats eneraux (States-eneral)--evoked in him a whole series
of ideas he had lon laid aside but which were deeply raven in his
soul: thouhts of the Contrat Social and the French Revolution. The
words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal--that the soverein
was comin to the capital for consultation with his people--strenthened
this idea. And imainin that in this direction somethin important
which he had lon awaited was drawin near, he strolled about watchin
and listenin to conversations, but nowhere findin any confirmation of
the ideas that occupied him.

The Emperor's manifesto was read, evokin enthusiasm, and then all moved
about discussin it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierre
heard questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand when
the Emperor entered, when a ball should be iven in the Emperor's honor,
whether they should roup themselves by districts or by whole
provinces... and so on; but as soon as the war was touched on, or what
the nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided and
indefinite. Then all preferred listenin to speakin.

A middle-aed man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retired
naval officer, was speakin in one of the rooms, and a small crowd was
pressin round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round
the speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform of
Catherine's time, was saunterin with a pleasant smile amon the crowd,
with all of whom he was acquainted. He too approached that roup and
listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did, to
what the speaker was sayin. The retired naval man was speakin very
boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners
and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
quietest of men walked away disapprovinly or expressed disareement
with him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the roup, listened,
and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views
quite different from his own. The naval officer spoke in a particularly
sonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly
swallowin his r's and enerally slurrin his consonants: the voice of a
man callin out to his servant, "Heah! Bwin me my pipe!" It was
indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.

"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the
Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacy
of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to our
sov'wein the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'otten the waisin of
the militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'
sons and thieves and wobbahs...."

Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.

"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuined
our farmin! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'n
neithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll et only depwavity fwom them.
The nobility don't wude theah lives--evewy one of us will o and bwin
in more wecwuits, and the sov'wein" (that was the way he referred to
the Emperor) "need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" added
the orator with animation.

Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nuded Pierre, but
Pierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feelin stirred, but
not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had he
opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in his
head, with a shrewd thouh anry expression, standin near the first
speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to manain debates and
to maintainin an arument, he bean in low but distinct tones:

"I imaine, sir," said he, mumblin with his toothless mouth, "that we
have been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best for the empire
at the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia.
We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our soverein
the Emperor has honored us. But to jude what is best--conscription or
the militia--we can leave to the supreme authority...."

Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart
aainst the senator who was introducin this set and narrow attitude
into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward and
interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would say, but he
bean to speak eaerly, occasionally lapsin into French or expressin
himself in bookish Russian.

"Excuse me, your excellency," he bean. (He was well acquainted with the
senator, but thouht it necessary on this occasion to address him
formally.) "Thouh I don't aree with the entleman..." (he hesitated:
he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"--"My very honorable
opponent") "with the entleman... whom I have not the honor of knowin,
I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express
their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which we
can assist our Fatherland! I imaine," he went on, warmin to his
subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us
merely owners of serfs whom we are willin to devote to his service, and
chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves--and not to obtain
from us any co-co-counsel."


* "Food for cannon."

Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticin the senator's sarcastic
smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov was pleased
with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, the
senator, and in eneral with whatever speech he had last heard.

"I think that before discussin these questions," Pierre continued, "we
should ask the Emperor--most respectfully ask His Majesty--to let us
know the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our
forces now are, and then..."

But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from
three sides. The most viorous attack came from an old acquaintance, a
boston player who had always been well disposed toward him, Stepan
Stepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a result
of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a
different man. With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aed face,
Adraksin shouted at Pierre:

"In the first place, I tell you we have no riht to question the Emperor
about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that riht, the
Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops are moved accordin
to the enemy's movements and the number of men increases and
decreases..."

Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium heiht and about forty years
of ae, whom Pierre had formerly met at the ypsies' and knew as a bad
cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,
interrupted Adraksin.

"Yes, and this is not a time for discussin," he continued, "but for
actin: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancin to destroy
Russia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives
and children." The nobleman smote his breast. "We will all arise, every
one of us will o, for our father the Tsar!" he shouted, rollin his
bloodshot eyes. Several approvin voices were heard in the crowd. "We
are Russians and will not rude our blood in defense of our faith, the
throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease ravin if we are sons of our
Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of
Russia!"

Pierre wished to reply, but could not et in a word. He felt that his
words, apart from what meanin they conveyed, were less audible than the
sound of his opponent's voice.

Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressin approval; several
persons, briskly turnin a shoulder to the orator at the end of a
phrase, said:

"That's riht, quite riht! Just so!"

Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, his
serfs, or himself, only one ouht to know the state of affairs in order
to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices
shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had not time
to sinify his approval of them all, and the roup increased, dispersed,
re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into the larest hall and
to the bi table. Not only was Pierre's attempt to speak unsuccessful,
but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned away from
him as from a common enemy. This happened not because they were
displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forotten
after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
tanible object to love and a tanible object to hate. Pierre became the
latter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in
the same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with oriinality.

linka, the editor of the Russian Messener, who was reconized (cries
of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must be
repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smilin at lihtnin
flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child."

"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvinly in the back rows
of the crowd.

The crowd drew up to the lare table, at which sat ray-haired or bald
seventy-year-old manates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom
Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playin
boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advanced
to the table. Pressed by the thron aainst the hih backs of the
chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two toether.
Those standin behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened
to supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find
some thouht and hastened to utter it. The old manates, whom Pierre
knew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at another, and their
faces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it very
hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the eneral desire to show that
they were ready to o to all lenths--which found expression in the
tones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches--infected him
too. He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to
blame and wished to justify himself.

"I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrifices
when we know what is needed!" said he, tryin to be heard above the
other voices.

One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention was
immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.

"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shouted
one man.

"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."
"entlemen, you are crushin me!..."




CHAPTER XXIII

At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protrudin chin and alert eyes,
wearin the uniform of a eneral with sash over his shoulder, entered
the room, steppin briskly to the front of the crowd of entry.

"Our soverein the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin.
"I am straiht from the palace. Seein the position we are in, I think
there is little need for discussion. The Emperor has deined to summon
us and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there"--he pointed
to the merchants' hall--"but our business is to supply men and not spare
ourselves... That is the least we can do!"

A conference took place confined to the manates sittin at the table.
The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the precedin
noise the sound of their old voices sayin one after another, "I aree,"
or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so on had even a
mournful effect.

The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscow
nobility and entry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,
out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk entry had done. Their
chairs made a scrapin noise as the entlemen who had conferred rose
with apparent relief, and bean walkin up and down, arm in arm, to
stretch their les and converse in couples.

"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded throuh the halls and
the whole thron hurried to the entrance.

The Emperor entered the hall throuh a broad path between two lines of
nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierre
stood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. From
what he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the daner
threatenin the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscow
nobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of the
resolution just arrived at.

"entlemen!" said the Emperor with a quiverin voice.

There was a rustlin amon the crowd and it aain subsided, so that
Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor sayin
with emotion:

"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has
surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!
entlemen, let us act! Time is most precious..."

The Emperor ceased speakin, the crowd bean pressin round him, and
rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.

"Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. He
stood at the back, and, thouh he had heard hardly anythin, understood
everythin in his own way.

From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants.
There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was amon those who saw him
come out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes. As
became known later, he had scarcely beun to address the merchants
before tears ushed from his eyes and he concluded in a tremblin voice.
When Pierre saw the Emperor he was comin out accompanied by two
merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was the
mayor, a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard. Both were
weepin. Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchik
sobbed outriht like a child and kept repeatin:

"Our lives and property--take them, Your Majesty!"

Pierre's one feelin at the moment was a desire to show that he was
ready to o all lenths and was prepared to sacrifice everythin. He now
felt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and souht
an opportunity of effacin it. Havin heard that Count Mamonov was
furnishin a reiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that he
would ive a thousand men and their maintenance.

Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and
at once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter his name.

Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took off
their uniforms and settled down aain in their homes and clubs, and not
without some roans ave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,
feelin amazed themselves at what they had done.

BOOK TEN: 1812




CHAPTER I

Napoleon bean the war with Russia because he could not resist oin to
Dresden, could not help havin his head turned by the homae he
received, could not help donnin a Polish uniform and yieldin to the
stimulatin influence of a June mornin, and could not refrain from
bursts of aner in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.

Alexander refused neotiations because he felt himself to be personally
insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way,
because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a reat
commander. Rostov chared the French because he could not restrain his
wish for a allop across a level field; and in the same way the
innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with their
personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims. They were
moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indinant, reasoned, imainin
that they knew what they were doin and did it of their own free will,
but they all were involuntary tools of history, carryin on a work
concealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable
fate of men of action, and the hiher they stand in the social hierarchy
the less are they free.

The actors of 1812 have lon since left the stae, their personal
interests have vanished leavin no trace, and nothin remains of that
time but its historic results.

Providence compelled all these men, strivin to attain personal aims, to
further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all
expected--neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those
who did the actual fihtin.

The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us
now. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance
into the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation for
a winter campain and, on the other, the character iven to the war by
the burnin of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this aroused
amon the Russian people. But no one at the time foresaw (what now seems
so evident) that this was the only way an army of eiht hundred thousand
men--the best in the world and led by the best eneral--could be
destroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strenth,
and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not only
did no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made to
hinder the only thin that could save Russia, while on the French side,
despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military enius, every
effort was directed to pushin on to Moscow at the end of the summer,
that is, to doin the very thin that was bound to lead to destruction.

In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of
sayin that Napoleon felt the daner of extendin his line, that he
souht a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,
and of makin similar statements to show that the daner of the campain
was even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder of tellin us
that from the commencement of the campain a Scythian war plan was
adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan some
of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others to
Toll, and others aain to Alexander himself--pointin to notes,
projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of action. But
all these hints at what happened, both from the French side and the
Russian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had that
event not occurred these hints would have been forotten, as we have
forotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to the
contrary which were current then but have now been forotten because the
event falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to the
issue of any event that however it may end there will always be people
to say: "I said then that it would be so," quite forettin that amid
their innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect.

Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the daner of extendin his
line, and (on the Russian side) as to lurin the enemy into the depths
of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much strainin can
historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals, or
such plans to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flat
contradiction to such conjectures. Durin the whole period of the war
not only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French into
the heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russia
everythin was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not afraid
to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and
did not seek battle as eaerly as in former campains, but very lazily.

At the very beinnin of the war our armies were divided, and our sole
aim was to unite them, thouh unitin the armies was no advantae if we
meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. Our
Emperor joined the army to encourae it to defend every inch of Russian
soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel's
plan, and there was no intention of retirin farther. The Emperor
reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He could
not bear the idea of lettin the enemy even reach Smolensk, still less
could he contemplate the burnin of Moscow, and when our armies did
unite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a
eneral enaement havin been fouht under its walls.

So thouht the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were still
more provoked at the thouht that our forces were retreatin into the
depths of the country.

Napoleon havin cut our armies apart advanced far into the country and
missed several chances of forcin an enaement. In Auust he was at
Smolensk and thouht only of how to advance farther, thouh as we now
see that advance was evidently ruinous to him.

The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the daner of the
advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders then
think of lurin Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The lurin of
Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,
for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complex
interplay of intriues, aims, and wishes amon those who took part in
the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one
way of savin Russia. Everythin came about fortuitously. The armies
were divided at the commencement of the campain. We tried to unite
them, with the evident intention of ivin battle and checkin the
enemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoidin battle
with a much stroner enemy, and necessarily withdrawin the armies at an
acute anle--we led the French on to Smolensk. But we withdrew at an
acute anle not only because the French advanced between our two armies;
the anle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, because
Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreiner disliked by Baration (who
would come under his command), and Baration--bein in command of the
second army--tried to postpone joinin up and comin under Barclay's
command as lon as he could. Baration was slow in effectin the
junction--thouh that was the chief aim of all at headquarters--because,
as he alleed, he exposed his army to daner on this march, and it was
best for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worryin
the enemy from flank and rear and securin from the Ukraine recruits for
his army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under
the command of the detested foreiner Barclay, whose rank was inferior
to his own.

The Emperor was with the army to encourae it, but his presence and
inorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers and
plans, destroyed the first army's enery and it retired.

The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci,
aimin at becomin commander-in-chief, unexpectedly employed his enery
to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and the
command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidence
his power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity of
command, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,
and the unpopularity of the forein commander-in-chief, there resulted
on the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we could
not have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,
instead of Barclay, been in command) and on the other an ever-increasin
indination aainst the foreiners and an increase in patriotic zeal.

At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeed
the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessary
for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation in
eneral to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow
the strenth of the Russian army was trebled.

He left in order not to obstruct the commander-in-chief's undivided
control of the army, and hopin that more decisive action would then be
taken, but the command of the armies became still more confused and
enfeebled. Bennisen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants eneral
remained with the army to keep the commander-in-chief under observation
and arouse his enery, and Barclay, feelin less free than ever under
the observation of all these "eyes of the Emperor," became still more
cautious of undertakin any decisive action and avoided ivin battle.

Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery and
demanded a eneral enaement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and the
others of that roup stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under
pretext of sendin papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish
adjutants eneral to Petersbur and pluned into an open strule with
Bennisen and the Tsarevich.

At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Baration disliked it.

Baration drove up in a carriae to the house occupied by Barclay.
Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his senior
officer Baration.

Despite his seniority in rank Baration, in this contest of mananimity,
took his orders from Barclay, but, havin submitted, areed with him
less than ever. By the Emperor's orders Baration reported direct to
him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as my
soverein pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meanin
Barclay). For od's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of a
reiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of ermans
that a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in anythin. I thouht
I was really servin my soverein and the Fatherland, but it turns out
that I am servin Barclay. I confess I do not want to."

The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzinerodes and their like still further
embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even less
unity resulted. Preparations were made to fiht the French before
Smolensk. A eneral was sent to survey the position. This eneral,
hatin Barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander,
and, havin spent the day with him, returned to Barclay and condemned,
as unsuitable from every point of view, the battleround he had not
seen.

While disputes and intriues were oin on about the future field of
battle, and while we were lookin for the French--havin lost touch with
them--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the
walls of Smolensk.

It was necessary to fiht an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save our
lines of communication. The battle was fouht and thousands were killed
on both sides.

Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of the
whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who had
been misled by their overnor. And these ruined inhabitants, settin an
example to other Russians, went to Moscow thinkin only of their own
losses but kindlin hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we
retired, thus arrivin at the very result which caused his destruction.




CHAPTER II

The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary
to come to his study.

"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my
son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts
me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,
loat over it! loat over it!"

After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was
ill and did not leave his study.

Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that durin this illness the old
prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit
Mademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.

At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former way
of life, devotin himself with special activity to buildin operations
and the arranement of the ardens and completely breakin off his
relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to his
dauhter seemed to say: "There, you see? You plotted aainst me, you
lied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made
me quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!"

Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watchin his
lessons, teachin him Russian and music herself, and talkin to
Dessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her old
nurse, or with "od's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see
her.

Of the war Princess Mary thouht as women do think about wars. She
feared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at the
strane cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did not
understand the sinificance of this war, which seemed to her like all
previous wars. She did not realize the sinificance of this war, thouh
Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interested
in its proress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her,
and thouh the "od's folk" who came to see her reported, in their own
way, the rumors current amon the people of an invasion by Antichrist,
and thouh Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who had resumed
correspondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow.

"I write you in Russian, my ood friend," wrote Julie in her Frenchified
Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the same
for their lanuae which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in
Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.

"My poor husband is endurin pains and huner in Jewish taverns, but the
news which I have inspires me yet more.

"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracin his two
sons and sayin: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!'
And truly thouh the enemy was twice stroner than we, we were
unshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! The
princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappy
widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our 'charpie',
only you, my friend, are missin..." and so on.

The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full sinificance of
this war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not reconize
it, and lauhed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner. The
prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary
unhesitatinly believed him.

All that July the old prince was exceedinly active and even animated.
He planned another arden and bean a new buildin for the domestic
serfs. The only thin that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that
he slept very little and, instead of sleepin in his study as usual,
chaned his sleepin place every day. One day he would order his camp
bed to be set up in the lass allery, another day he remained on the
couch or on the loune chair in the drawin room and dozed there without
undressin, while--instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne--a serf boy read to
him. Then aain he would spend a niht in the dinin room.

On Auust 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his
first letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had
dutifully asked his father's foriveness for what he had allowed himself
to say and beed to be restored to his favor. To this letter the old
prince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept the
Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second letter, written near
Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, ave a brief account of
the whole campain, enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecasts
as to the further proress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew
pointed out to his father the daner of stayin at Bald Hills, so near
the theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and advised
him to move to Moscow.

At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentionin that the French were said
to have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's
letter.

"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess Mary-
-"Haven't you read it?"

"No, Father," she replied in a frihtened voice.

She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it had
arrived.

"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile that
had become habitual to him in speakin of the present war.

"That must be very interestin," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in a
position to know..."

"Oh, very interestin!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.

"o and et it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
"You know--under the paperweiht on the little table."

Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eaerly.

"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You o, Michael Ivanovich."

Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left
the room the old prince, lookin uneasily round, threw down his napkin
and went himself.

"They can't do anythin... always make some muddle," he muttered.

While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and
even little Nicholas exchaned looks in silence. The old prince returned
with quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, brinin the letter
and a plan. These he put down beside him--not lettin anyone read them
at dinner.

On movin to the drawin room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,
spreadin out before him the plan of the new buildin and fixin his
eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done so
Princess Mary looked inquirinly at her father. He was examinin the
plan, evidently enrossed in his own ideas.

"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.

"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not takin
his eyes from the plan of the buildin.

"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."

"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and still
say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never et
beyond the Niemen."

Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talkin of the
Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary,
forettin the eoraphical position of the Niemen, thouht that what
her father was sayin was correct.

"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they could
fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinkin of the
campain of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennisen should have
advanced into Prussia sooner, then thins would have taken a different
turn..."

"But, Prince," Dessalles bean timidly, "the letter mentions
Vitebsk...."

"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..."
His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he
writes that the French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"

Dessalles dropped his eyes.

"The prince says nothin about that," he remarked ently.

"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."

No one spoke for a lon time.

"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raisin
his head and pointin to the plan of the buildin, "tell me how you mean
to alter it...."

Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speakin to
him about the buildin looked anrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles and
went to his own room.

Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed on
her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that her
father had forotten his son's letter on the drawin-room table; but she
was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of his
confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.

In the evenin Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess
Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forotten in the drawin
room. She ave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so,
ventured to ask him what her father was doin.

"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic
smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worryin very much
about the new buildin. He has been readin a little, but now"--Michael
Ivanovich went on, lowerin his voice--"now he's at his desk, busy with
his will, I expect." (One of the prince's favorite occupations of late
had been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his death
and which he called his "will.")

"And Alpatych is bein sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.

"Oh, yes, he has been waitin to start for some time."




CHAPTER III

When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the old
prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sittin at his
open bureau with screened candles, holdin a paper in his outstretched
hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was readin his manuscript--
his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be transmitted to the
Emperor after his death.

When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes
evoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now readin had
been written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it
in his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had lon
been waitin.

The prince had a list of thins to be bouht in Smolensk and, walkin up
and down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he ave his
instructions.

"First, notepaper--do you hear? Eiht quires, like this sample, ilt-
eded... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealin wax, as in
Michael Ivanovich's list."

He paced up and down for a while and lanced at his notes.

"Then hand to the overnor in person a letter about the deed."

Next, bolts for the doors of the new buildin were wanted and had to be
of a special shape the prince had himself desined, and a leather case
had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.

The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the prince
did not let him o. He sat down, sank into thouht, closed his eyes, and
dozed off. Alpatych made a sliht movement.

"Well, o, o! If anythin more is wanted I'll send after you."

Alpatych went out. The prince aain went to his bureau, lanced into it,
finered his papers, closed the bureau aain, and sat down at the table
to write to the overnor.

It was already late when he rose after sealin the letter. He wished to
sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressin
thouhts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went throuh the
rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that niht.

He went about lookin at every corner. Every place seemed
unsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.
That couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressive
thouhts he had had when lyin there. It was unsatisfactory everywhere,
but the corner behind the piano in the sittin room was better than
other places: he had never slept there yet.

With the help of a footman Tikhon brouht in the bedstead and bean
puttin it up.

"That's not riht! That's not riht!" cried the prince, and himself
pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in aain.

"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thouht the prince, and
let Tikhon undress him.

Frownin with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of his
coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the bed,
and appeared to be meditatin as he looked contemptuously at his
withered yellow les. He was not meditatin, but only deferrin the
moment of makin the effort to lift those les up and turn over on the
bed. "Uh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil miht end and you would
release me!" thouht he. Pressin his lips toether he made that effort
for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had he done so
before he felt the bed rockin backwards and forwards beneath him as if
it were breathin heavily and joltin. This happened to him almost every
niht. He opened his eyes as they were closin.

"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, anry he knew not with whom. "Ah
yes, there was somethin else important, very important, that I was
keepin till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.
No, it was somethin, somethin in the drawin room. Princess Mary
talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said somethin. Somethin in
my pocket--can't remember..."

"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"

"About Prince Michael..."

"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, I
know, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles said
somethin about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."

He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table--on which stood a
lass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle--moved close to the bed, and
puttin on his spectacles he bean readin. Only now in the stillness of
the niht, readin it by the faint liht under the reen shade, did he
rasp its meanin for a moment.

"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;
perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don't
want anythin!" he shouted.

He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And there
rose before him the Danube at briht noonday: reeds, the Russian camp,
and himself a youn eneral without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,
viorous and alert, enterin Potemkin's aily colored tent, and a
burnin sense of jealousy of "the favorite" aitated him now as stronly
as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that first
meetin with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather sallow-
faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile and her
words at her first racious reception of him, and then that same face on
the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over her coffin
about his riht to kiss her hand.

"Oh, quicker, quicker! To et back to that time and have done with all
the present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in peace!"




CHAPTER IV

Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles east
from Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.

The same evenin that the prince ave his instructions to Alpatych,
Dessalles, havin asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the
prince was not very well and was takin no steps to secure his safety,
thouh from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident that to remain at Bald
Hills miht be danerous, he respectfully advised her to send a letter
by Alpatych to the Provincial overnor at Smolensk, askin him to let
her know the state of affairs and the extent of the daner to which Bald
Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the overnor for
Princess Mary, she sined it, and it was iven to Alpatych with
instructions to hand it to the overnor and to come back as quickly as
possible if there was daner.

Havin received all his orders Alpatych, wearin a white beaver hat--a
present from the prince--and carryin a stick as the prince did, went
out accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood ready
harnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.

The larer bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffed
with paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with
rinin bells; but on a lon journey Alpatych liked to have them. His
satellites--the senior clerk, a countinhouse clerk, a scullery maid, a
cook, two old women, a little paeboy, the coachman, and various
domestic serfs--were seein him off.

His dauhter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on and
behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and one
of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.

"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffin and
speakin rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.

After ivin the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not
tryin to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and
crossed himself three times.

"If there is anythin... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sake
think of us!" cried his wife, referrin to the rumors of war and the
enemy.

"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started
on his journey, lookin round at the fields of yellow rye and the still-
reen, thickly rowin oats, and at other quite black fields just bein
plowed a second time.

As he went alon he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop of
corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there were
already bein reaped, made his calculations as to the sowin and the
harvest, and asked himself whether he had not forotten any of the
prince's orders.

Havin baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town toward
evenin on the fourth of Auust.

Alpatych kept meetin and overtakin baae trains and troops on the
road. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firin,
but these did not impress him. What struck him most was the siht of a
splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which was
bein mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This fact
impressed Alpatych, but in thinkin about his own business he soon
forot it.

All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been
bounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit.
Everythin not connected with the execution of the prince's orders did
not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.

On reachin Smolensk on the evenin of the fourth of Auust he put up in
the achina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov,
where he had been in the habit of puttin up for the last thirty years.
Some thirty years ao Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bouht a
wood from the prince, had beun to trade, and now had a house, an inn,
and a corn dealer's shop in that province. He was a stout, dark, red-
faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a nose,
similar knobs over his black frownin brows, and a round belly.

Wearin a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standin
before his shop which opened onto the street. On seein Alpatych he went
up to him.

"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leavin the town, but you
have come to it," said he.

"Why are they leavin the town?" asked Alpatych.

"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."

"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.

"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have been
iven not to let them in, so that must be riht. And the peasants are
askin three rubles for cartin--it isn't Christian!"

Yakov Alpatych heard without heedin. He asked for a samovar and for hay
for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.

All niht lon troops were movin past the inn. Next mornin Alpatych
donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was a
sunny mornin and by eiht o'clock it was already hot. "A ood day for
harvestin," thouht Alpatych.

From beyond the town firin had been heard since early mornin. At eiht
o'clock the boomin of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Many
people were hurryin throuh the streets and there were many soldiers,
but cabs were still drivin about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and
service was bein held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the
shops, to overnment offices, to the post office, and to the overnor's.
In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talkin
about the army and about the enemy who was already attackin the town,
everybody was askin what should be done, and all were tryin to calm
one another.

In front of the overnor's house Alpatych found a lare number of
people, Cossacks, and a travelin carriae of the overnor's. At the
porch he met two of the landed entry, one of whom he knew. This man, an
ex-captain of police, was sayin anrily:

"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're sinle. 'One man
thouh undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen in
your family and all the property... They've brouht us to utter ruin!
What sort of overnors are they to do that? They ouht to be haned--the
briands!..."

"Oh come, that's enouh!" said the other.

"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dos," said the ex-captain of
police, and lookin round he noticed Alpatych.

"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"

"To see the overnor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych,
liftin his head and proudly thrustin his hand into the bosom of his
coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has ordered
me to inquire into the position of affairs," he added.

"Yes, o and find out!" shouted the anry entleman. "They've brouht
thins to such a pass that there are no carts or anythin!... There it
is aain, do you hear?" said he, pointin in the direction whence came
the sounds of firin.

"They've brouht us all to ruin... the briands!" he repeated, and
descended the porch steps.

Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waitin room were
tradesmen, women, and officials, lookin silently at one another. The
door of the overnor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward.
An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stout
official with a cross hanin on his neck to follow him, and vanished
aain, evidently wishin to avoid the inquirin looks and questions
addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the official came
out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat,
and handed him two letters.

"To his Honor Baron Asch, from eneral-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," he
announced with such solemnity and sinificance that the official turned
to him and took the letters.

A few minutes later the overnor received Alpatych and hurriedly said to
him:

"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothin: I acted on the
hihest instructions--here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych.
"Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should o to
Moscow. I am just startin myself. Inform them..."

But the overnor did not finish: a dusty perspirin officer ran into the
room and bean to say somethin in French. The overnor's face expressed
terror.

"o," he said, noddin his head to Alpatych, and bean questionin the
officer.

Eaer, frihtened, helpless lances were turned on Alpatych when he came
out of the overnor's room. Involuntarily listenin now to the firin,
which had drawn nearer and was increasin in strenth, Alpatych hurried
to his inn. The paper handed to him by the overnor said this:

"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slihtest daner
as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I from
the one side and Prince Baration from the other are marchin to unite
our forces before Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the 22nd
instant, and both armies with their united forces will defend our
compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts
shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland, or till the last
warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see that
you have a perfect riht to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, for
those defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory."
(Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil overnor of
Smolensk, 1812.)

People were anxiously roamin about the streets.

Carts piled hih with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards kept
emerin from the ates of the yards and movin alon the streets.
Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were
wailin and lamentin as they said ood-by. A small watchdo ran round
barkin in front of the harnessed horses.

Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went
straiht to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was
asleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into the passae.
From the host's room came the sounds of a child cryin, the despairin
sobs of a woman, and the hoarse anry shoutin of Ferapontov. The cook
bean runnin hither and thither in the passae like a frihtened hen,
just as Alpatych entered.

"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... draed her
about so!..."

"What for?" asked Alpatych.

"She kept bein to o away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she,
'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all
one, so why,' she says, 'don't we o?' And he bean beatin and pullin
her about so!"

At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishin to
hear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where
he had left his purchases.

"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby
in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst throuh the door
at that moment and down the steps into the yard.

Ferapontov came out after her, but on seein Alpatych adjusted his
waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into the
opposite room.

"oin already?" said he.

Alpatych, without answerin or lookin at his host, sorted his packaes
and asked how much he owed.

"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the overnor's?" asked
Ferapontov. "What has been decided?"

Alpatych replied that the overnor had not told him anythin definite.

"With our business, how can we et away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have to
pay seven rubles a cartload to Doroobuzh and I tell them they're not
Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a ood stroke last Thursday--
sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have some tea?"
he added.

While the horses were bein harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their
tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the ood weather for
harvestin.

"Well, it seems to be ettin quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishin
his third cup of tea and ettin up. "Ours must have ot the best of it.
The orders were not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems.... They
say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the river
Marina and drowned some eihteen thousand in one day."

Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come
in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and
bells was heard from the ateway as a little trap passed out.

It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, the
other half brihtly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the window
and went to the door. Suddenly the strane sound of a far-off whistlin
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blendin into a dull
roar that set the windows rattlin.

He went out into the street: two men were runnin past toward the
bride. From different sides came whistlin sounds and the thud of
cannon balls and burstin shells fallin on the town. But these sounds
were hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firin outside the
town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants. The town was
bein bombarded by a hundred and thirty uns which Napoleon had ordered
up after four o'clock. The people did not at once realize the meanin of
this bombardment.

At first the noise of the fallin bombs and shells only aroused
curiosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailin under
the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the ate,
listenin to the sounds and lookin in silence at the people.

The cook and a shop assistant came to the ate. With lively curiosity
everyone tried to et a limpse of the projectiles as they flew over
their heads. Several people came round the corner talkin eaerly.

"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceilin all to
splinters!"

"Routed up the earth like a pi," said another.

"That's rand, it bucks one up!" lauhed the first. "Lucky you jumped
aside, or it would have wiped you out!"

Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallen
on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with the
swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the areeable
intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly,
but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatych was ettin into
his trap. The innkeeper stood at the ate.

"What are you starin at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt,
with sleeves rolled up, swinin her bare elbows, had stepped to the
corner to listen to what was bein said.

"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearin her master's voice she turned
back, pullin down her tucked-up skirt.

Once more somethin whistled, but this time quite close, swoopin
downwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of the
street, somethin exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.

"Scoundrel, what are you doin?" shouted the innkeeper, rushin to the
cook.

At that moment the pitiful wailin of women was heard from different
sides, the frihtened baby bean to cry, and people crowded silently
with pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was her
wailin.

"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My ood
souls!..."

Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her
thih broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.
Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house
porter were all sittin in the cellar, listenin. The roar of uns, the
whistlin of projectiles, and the piteous moanin of the cook, which
rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The mistress
rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked in
a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained in
the street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had one
with others to the cathedral, whence they were fetchin the wonder-
workin icon of Smolensk.

Toward dusk the cannonade bean to subside. Alpatych left the cellar and
stopped in the doorway. The evenin sky that had been so clear was
clouded with smoke, throuh which, hih up, the sickle of the new moon
shone stranely. Now that the terrible din of the uns had ceased a hush
seemed to rein over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,
the moanin, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemed
widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sides
black curlin clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires. Throuh
the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in
different directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill. Several of them
ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's eyes. Alpatych went out to
the ate. A retreatin reiment, thronin and hurryin, blocked the
street.

Noticin him, an officer said: "The town is bein abandoned. et away,
et away!" and then, turnin to the soldiers, shouted:

"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"

Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him to
set off. Ferapontov's whole household came out too, followin Alpatych
and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenly
bean to wail as they looked at the fires--the smoke and even the flames
of which could be seen in the failin twiliht--and as if in reply the
same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.
Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arraned the tanled reins and
traces of their horses with tremblin hands.

As Alpatych was drivin out of the ate he saw some ten soldiers in
Ferapontov's open shop, talkin loudly and fillin their bas and
knapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned
and entered his shop. On seein the soldiers he was about to shout at
them, but suddenly stopped and, clutchin at his hair, burst into sobs
and lauhter:

"Loot everythin, lads! Don't let those devils et it!" he cried, takin
some bas of flour himself and throwin them into the street.

Some of the soldiers were frihtened and ran away, others went on
fillin their bas. On seein Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:

"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire
myself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.

Soldiers were passin in a constant stream alon the street blockin it
completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.
Ferapontov's wife and children were also sittin in a cart waitin till
it was possible to drive out.

Niht had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone out
amid the smoke that screened it. On the slopin descent to the Dnieper
Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowly
movin amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop. In
a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a
house and some shops were on fire. This fire was already burnin itself
out. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now
suddenly flared up aain brihtly, lihtin up with strane distinctness
the faces of the people crowdin at the crossroads. Black fiures
flitted about before the fire, and throuh the incessant cracklin of
the flames talkin and shoutin could be heard. Seein that his trap
would not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych ot down and turned
into the side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually
rushin backwards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a man
in a frieze coat drain burnin beams into another yard across the
street, while others carried bundles of hay.

Alpatych went up to a lare crowd standin before a hih barn which was
blazin briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen
in, the wooden roof was collapsin, and the rafters were aliht. The
crowd was evidently watchin for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych
watched for it too.

"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.

"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediately
reconizin the voice of his youn prince.

Prince Andrew in his ridin cloak, mounted on a black horse, was lookin
at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.

"Why are you here?" he asked.

"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are
we really lost? Master!..."

"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.

At that moment the flames flared up and showed his youn master's pale
worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult it
was to et away.

"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked aain.

Prince Andrew without replyin took out a notebook and raisin his knee
bean writin in pencil on a pae he tore out. He wrote to his sister:

"Smolensk is bein abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy
within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when
you will start. Send by special messener to Usvyazh."

Havin written this and iven the paper to Alpatych, he told him how to
arrane for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and the
boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before he
had had time to finish ivin these instructions, a chief of staff
followed by a suite alloped up to him.

"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a erman accent, in
a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in your
presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for it!"
shouted Ber, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the
commander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,
as Ber said, "very areeable and well en evidence."

Prince Andrew looked at him and without replyin went on speakin to
Alpatych.

"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by the
tenth I don't receive news that they have all ot away I shall have to
throw up everythin and come myself to Bald Hills."

"Prince," said Ber, reconizin Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because I
have to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You must
please excuse me," he went on apoloetically.

Somethin cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another
terrible crash and somethin hue collapsed.

"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoin the crash of the collapsin roof
of the barn, the burnin rain in which diffused a cakelike aroma all
around. The flames flared up aain, lihtin the animated, delihted,
exhausted faces of the spectators.

The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:

"It's fine, lads! Now it's rain... It's fine!"

"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.

"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as I
have told you"; and not replyin a word to Ber who was now mute beside
him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.




CHAPTER V

From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy. On
the tenth of Auust the reiment Prince Andrew commanded was marchin
alon the hihroad past the avenue leadin to Bald Hills. Heat and
drouht had continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds
floated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but toward
evenin the sky cleared aain and the sun set in reddish-brown mist.
Heavy niht dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn was
scorched and shed its rain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed from
huner, findin no food on the sun-parched meadows. Only at niht and in
the forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on the
road, the hihroad alon which the troops marched, there was no such
freshness even at niht or when the road passed throuh the forest; the
dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inches
deep. As soon as day dawned the march bean. The artillery and baae
waons moved noiselessly throuh the deep dust that rose to the very
hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,
chokin, hot dust that never cooled even at niht. Some of this dust was
kneaded by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hun like a
cloud over the troops, settlin in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and
worst of all in the luns of the men and beasts as they moved alon that
road. The hiher the sun rose the hiher rose that cloud of dust, and
throuh the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with naked
eye at the sun, which showed like a hue crimson ball in the unclouded
sky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless
atmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and
mouths. When they passed throuh a villae they all rushed to the wells
and fouht for the water and drank it down to the mud.

Prince Andrew was in command of a reiment, and the manaement of that
reiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receivin and
ivin orders, enrossed him. The burnin of Smolensk and its
abandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feelin of aner aainst
the foe made him foret his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to the
affairs of his reiment and was considerate and kind to his men and
officers. In the reiment they called him "our prince," were proud of
him and loved him. But he was kind and entle only to those of his
reiment, to Timokhin and the like--people quite new to him, belonin
to a different world and who could not know and understand his past. As
soon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the staff,
he bristled up immediately and rew spiteful, ironical, and
contemptuous. Everythin that reminded him of his past was repunant to
him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himself
to tryin to do his duty and not to be unfair.

In truth everythin presented itself in a dark and loomy liht to
Prince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixth
of Auust (he considered that it could and should have been defended)
and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandonin to
pillae his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled.
But despite this, thanks to his reiment, Prince Andrew had somethin to
think about entirely apart from eneral questions. Two days previously
he had received news that his father, son, and sister had left for
Moscow; and thouh there was nothin for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince
Andrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own rief decided that
he must ride there.

He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leavin his reiment on the
march, rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent his
childhood. Ridin past the pond where there used always to be dozens of
women chatterin as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wooden
beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that
the little washin wharf, torn from its place and half submered, was
floatin on its side in the middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's
lode. No one at the stone entrance ates of the drive and the door
stood open. rass had already beun to row on the arden paths, and
horses and calves were strayin in the Enlish park. Prince Andrew rode
up to the hothouse; some of the lass panes were broken, and of the
trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called for
Taras the ardener, but no one replied. Havin one round the corner of
the hothouse to the ornamental arden, he saw that the carved arden
fence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off with
the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
seen at the ate was sittin on a reen arden seat, plaitin a bast
shoe.

He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sittin on
the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips of
bast were hanin on the broken and withered branch of a manolia.

Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old arden had
been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wanderin in front of
the house amon the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at
one window which was open. A little serf boy, seein Prince Andrew, ran
into the house. Alpatych, havin sent his family away, was alone at Bald
Hills and was sittin indoors readin the Lives of the Saints. On
hearin that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles on
his nose, buttonin his coat, and, hastily steppin up, without a word
bean weepin and kissin Prince Andrew's knee.

Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and bean to report on
the position of affairs. Everythin precious and valuable had been
removed to Boucharovo. Seventy quarters of rain had also been carted
away. The hay and the sprin corn, of which Alpatych said there had been
a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops and
mown down while still reen. The peasants were ruined; some of them too
had one to Boucharovo, only a few remained.

Without waitin to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:

"When did my father and sister leave?" meanin when did they leave for
Moscow.

Alpatych, understandin the question to refer to their departure for
Boucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and aain went
into details concernin the estate manaement, askin for instructions.

"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them?
We have still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.

"What am I to say to him?" thouht Prince Andrew, lookin down on the
old man's bald head shinin in the sun and seein by the expression on
his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions
were and only asked them to allay his rief.

"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.

"If you noticed some disorder in the arden," said Alpatych, "it was
impossible to prevent it. Three reiments have been here and spent the
niht, draoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their
commandin officer, to hand in a complaint about it."

"Well, and what are you oin to do? Will you stay here if the enemy
occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.

Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly
with a solemn esture raised his arm.

"He is my refue! His will be done!" he exclaimed.

A roup of bareheaded peasants was approachin across the meadow toward
the prince.

"Well, ood-by!" said Prince Andrew, bendin over to Alpatych. "You must
o away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to o to the
Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."

Alpatych clun to Prince Andrew's le and burst into sobs. ently
disenain himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the
avenue at a allop.

The old man was still sittin in the ornamental arden, like a fly
impassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tappin the last on
which he was makin the bast shoe, and two little irls, runnin out
from the hot house carryin in their skirts plums they had plucked from
the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seein the youn master,
the elder one with frihtened look clutched her youner companion by the
hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stoppin to pick up some
reen plums they had dropped.

Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwillin to let them see
that they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frihtened
little irl, was afraid of lookin at her, and yet felt an irresistible
desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him
when, seein these irls, he realized the existence of other human
interests entirely aloof from his own and just as leitimate as those
that occupied him. Evidently these irls passionately desired one thin-
-to carry away and eat those reen plums without bein cauht--and
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He
could not resist lookin at them once more. Believin their daner past,
they spran from their ambush and, chirrupin somethin in their shrill
little voices and holdin up their skirts, their bare little sunburned
feet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow rass.

Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by havin ridden off the dusty
hihroad alon which the troops were movin. But not far from Bald Hills
he aain came out on the road and overtook his reiment at its haltin
place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun, a
red ball throuh the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably
throuh his black coat. The dust always hun motionless above the buzz
of talk that came from the restin troops. There was no wind. As he
crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of the
pond. He loned to et into that water, however dirty it miht be, and
he lanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks and
lauhter. The small, muddy, reen pond had risen visibly more than a
foot, floodin the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies of
soldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashin
about in it. All this naked white human flesh, lauhin and shriekin,
floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a waterin
can, and the suestion of merriment in that flounderin mass rendered
it specially pathetic.

One fair-haired youn soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrew
knew and who had a strap round the calf of one le, crossed himself,
stepped back to et a ood run, and pluned into the water; another, a
dark noncommissioned officer who was always shay, stood up to his
waist in the water joyfully wrilin his muscular fiure and snorted
with satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands
blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slappin one another,
yellin, and puffin.

Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,
white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose,
standin on the dam wipin himself with a towel, felt confused at seein
the prince, but made up his mind to address him nevertheless.

"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.

"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, makin a rimace.

"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still
undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.

"The prince wants to bathe."

"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste to
clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that he
would rather wash himself with water in the barn.

"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thouht, and he looked at his own
naked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disust and
horror he did not himself understand, aroused by the siht of that
immense number of bodies splashin about in the dirty pond.

On the seventh of Auust Prince Baration wrote as follows from his
quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:

Dear Count Alexis Andreevich--(He was writin to Arakcheev but knew that
his letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weihed every
word in it to the best of his ability.)

I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported the
abandonment of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and the
whole army is in despair that this most important place has been
wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, beed him personally most urently
and finally wrote him, but nothin would induce him to consent. I swear
to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before and
miht have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk. Our
troops fouht, and are fihtin, as never before. With fifteen thousand
men I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him; but he
would not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disraceful, a stain
on our army, and as for him, he ouht, it seems to me, not to live. If
he reports that our losses were reat, it is not true; perhaps about
four thousand, not more, and not even that; but even were they ten
thousand, that's war! But the enemy has lost masses...

What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would
have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men or
horses. He ave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sent
instructions that he was retirin that niht. We cannot fiht in this
way, or we may soon brin the enemy to Moscow...

There is a rumor that you are thinkin of peace. od forbid that you
should make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You
would set all Russia aainst you and every one of us would feel ashamed
to wear the uniform. If it has come to this--we must fiht as lon as
Russia can and as lon as there are men able to stand...

One man ouht to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhaps
be ood as a Minister, but as a eneral he is not merely bad but
execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I
am really frantic with vexation; forive my writin boldly. It is clear
that the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that the
Minister should command the army, does not love our soverein and
desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly: call out the
militia. For the Minister is leadin these visitors after him to Moscow
in a most masterly way. The whole army feels reat suspicion of the
Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzoen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man
than ours, and he is always advisin the Minister. I am not merely civil
to him but obey him like a corporal, thouh I am his senior. This is
painful, but, lovin my benefactor and soverein, I submit. Only I am
sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he.
Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatiue and left in the
hospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would
not have happened. Tell me, for od's sake, what will Russia, our mother
Russia, say to our bein so frihtened, and why are we abandonin our
ood and allant Fatherland to such rabble and implantin feelins of
hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of whom
are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillatin, a
coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole army
bewails it and calls down curses upon him...




CHAPTER VI

Amon the innumerable cateories applicable to the phenomena of human
life one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails and
those in which form prevails. To the latter--as distinuished from
villae, country, provincial, or even Moscow life--we may allot
Petersbur life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of the
salons is unchanin. Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had
aain quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade
them aain, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and Helene remained just as
they had been--the one seven and the other five years before. At Anna
Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's successes just as
before and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by the
European sovereins a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which was
to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna
Pavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev
himself honored with his visits, reardin Helene as a remarkably
intellient woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808
of the "reat nation" and the "reat man," and reretted our rupture
with France, a rupture which, accordin to them, ouht to be promptly
terminated by peace.

Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been some
excitement in these conflictin salon circles and some demonstrations of
hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency. In
Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were deep-
rooted leitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the effect
that one ouht not to o to the French theater and that to maintain the
French troupe was costin the overnment as much as a whole army corps.
The proress of the war was eaerly followed, and only the reports most
flatterin to our army were circulated. In the French circle of Helene
and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the war
were contradicted and all Napoleon's attempts at conciliation were
discussed. In that circle they discountenanced those who advised hurried
preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and the irls'
educational establishments under the patronae of the Dowaer Empress.
In Helene's circle the war in eneral was rearded as a series of formal
demonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the view
prevailed expressed by Bilibin--who now in Petersbur was quite at home
in Helene's house, which every clever man was oblied to visit--that not
by unpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled. In
that circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had reached Petersbur
simultaneously with the Emperor's return--was ridiculed sarcastically
and very cleverly, thouh with much caution.

Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasm
and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. Prince
Vasili, who still occupied his former important posts, formed a
connectin link between these two circles. He visited his "ood friend
Anna Pavlovna" as well as his dauhter's "diplomatic salon," and often
in his constant comins and oins between the two camps became confused
and said at Helene's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna's and
vice versa.

Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation about
the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but was
undecided as to who ouht to be appointed commander-in-chief. One of the
visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of reat merit," havin described
how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the
Petersbur militia, presidin over the enrollment of recruits at the
Treasury, cautiously ventured to suest that Kutuzov would be the man
to satisfy all requirements.

Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done
nothin but cause the Emperor annoyance.

"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Prince
Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his
election as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They did
not listen to me.

"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is
all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,"
Prince Vasili continued, forettin for a moment that thouh at Helene's
one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to
be ecstatic about it. But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is it
suitable that Count Kutuzov, the oldest eneral in Russia, should
preside at that tribunal? He will et nothin for his pains! How could
they make a man commander-in-chief who cannot mount a horse, who drops
asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A ood reputation he
made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as a
eneral, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old
man, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind eneral! He can't see
anythin. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"

No one replied to his remarks.

This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the twenty-
ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This miht indicate
a wish to et rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinion
continued to be correct thouh he was not now in any hurry to express
it. But on the eihth of Auust a committee, consistin of Field Marshal
Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider
the proress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that our
failures were due to a want of unity in the command and thouh the
members of the committee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov,
after a short deliberation they areed to advise his appointment as
commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander-in-
chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole reion
occupied by them.

On the ninth of Auust Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's aain met the
"man of reat merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna
because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational
establishments for youn ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the
air of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires.

"Well, have you heard the reat news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal!
All dissensions are at an end! I am so lad, so delihted! At last we
have a man!" said he, lancin sternly and sinificantly round at
everyone in the drawin room.

The "man of reat merit," despite his desire to obtain the post of
director, could not refrain from remindin Prince Vasili of his former
opinion. Thouh this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna's
drawin room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the
news with deliht, he could not resist the temptation.

"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, remindin Prince Vasili of
his own words.

"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enouh," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a
deep voice and with a sliht couh--the voice and couh with which he
was wont to dispose of all difficulties.

"He sees well enouh," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he
went on, "is that our soverein has iven him full powers over all the
armies and the whole reion--powers no commander-in-chief ever had
before. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile.

"od rant it! od rant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.

The "man of reat merit," who was still a novice in court circles,
wishin to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defendin her former position on
this question, observed:

"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to ive Kutuzov those powers.
They say he blushed like a irl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to
Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"

"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.

"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yield
Kutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirable
himself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he,
"for our soverein appreciated him so hihly before."

"od rant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not
allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.

Understandin at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in a
whisper:

"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that the
Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to the
Emperor?"

And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by
Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wron nor
reward him if he does riht."

"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a lon time!"

"They even say," remarked the "man of reat merit" who did not yet
possess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition
that the soverein himself should not be with the army."

As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away
from him and lanced sadly at one another with a sih at his naivete.




CHAPTER VII

While this was takin place in Petersbur the French had already passed
Smolensk and were drawin nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's
historian Thiers, like other of his historians, tryin to justify his
hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow aainst his will. He
is as riht as other historians who look for the explanation of historic
events in the will of one man; he is as riht as the Russian historians
who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the
Russian commanders. Here besides the law of retrospection, which reards
all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur, the
law of reciprocity comes in, confusin the whole matter. A ood
chessplayer havin lost a ame is sincerely convinced that his loss
resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the
openin, but forets that at each stae of the ame there were similar
mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the
mistake to which he pays attention, because his opponent took advantae
of it. How much more complex than this is the ame of war, which occurs
under certain limits of time, and where it is not one will that
manipulates lifeless objects, but everythin results from innumerable
conflicts of various wills!

After Smolensk Napoleon souht a battle beyond Doroobuzh at Vyazma, and
then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owin to a conjunction
of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not ive battle till
they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon
ordered a direct advance on Moscow.

Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce rand empire, la ville sacree des
peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables elises en forme de
paodes chinoises, * this Moscow ave Napoleon's imaination no rest. On
the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his liht bay
bobtailed ambler accompanied by his uards, his bodyuard, his paes,
and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to
question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed by
Lelorne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a allop
and reined in his horse with an amused expression.


* "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this reat empire, the sacred city of
Alexander's people, Moscow with its innumerable churches shaped like
Chinese paodas."

"Well?" asked Napoleon.

"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joinin up with
the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander-in-chief. He
is a very shrewd and arrulous fellow."

Napoleon smiled and told them to ive the Cossack a horse and brin the
man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants alloped
off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over to
Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a French
cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
by his side and bean questionin him.

"You are a Cossack?"

"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."

"The Cossack, not knowin in what company he was, for Napoleon's plain
appearance had nothin about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind
the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the
incidents of the war," says Thiers, narratin this episode. In reality
Lavrushka, havin ot drunk the day before and left his master
dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the villae in quest of
chickens, where he enaed in lootin till the French took him prisoner.
Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who have seen all
sorts of thins, consider it necessary to do everythin in a mean and
cunnin way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master,
and are keen at uessin their master's baser impulses, especially those
prompted by vanity and pettiness.

Findin himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily
and surely reconized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely
did his utmost to ain his new master's favor.

He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence could
no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sereant major's with the
rods, would have done, for he had nothin that either the sereant major
or Napoleon could deprive him of.

So he rattled on, tellin all the ossip he had heard amon the
orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether the
Russians thouht they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up
his eyes and considered.

In this question he saw subtle cunnin, as men of his type see cunnin
in everythin, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.

"It's like this," he said thouhtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours
will win. That's riht. But if three days pass, then after that, well,
then that same battle will not soon be over."

Lelorne d'Ideville smilinly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:
"If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will win,
but if later, od knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile,
thouh he was evidently in hih ood humor, and he ordered these words
to be repeated.

Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretendin not to
know who Napoleon was, added:

"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the
world, but we are a different matter..."--without knowin why or how
this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.

The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, and
Bonaparte smiled. "The youn Cossack made his mihty interlocutor
smile," says Thiers. After ridin a few paces in silence, Napoleon
turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was
talkin to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his
immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du
Don. *


* "Child of the Don."

The fact was accordinly conveyed to Lavrushka.

Lavrushka, understandin that this was done to perplex him and that
Napoleon expected him to be frihtened, to ratify his new masters
promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyes
wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be
whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers,
"the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rode
on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across
the steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and
replaced by a naive and silent feelin of admiration. Napoleon, after
makin the Cossack a present, had him set free like a bird restored to
its native fields."

Napoleon rode on, dreamin of the Moscow that so appealed to his
imaination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" alloped to
our outposts, inventin on the way all that had not taken place but that
he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he did
not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth tellin. He found
the Cossacks, inquired for the reiment operatin with Platov's
detachment and by evenin found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered
at Yankovo. Rostov was just mountin to o for a ride round the
neihborin villaes with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have another horse and
took him alon with him.




CHAPTER VIII

Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of daner as Prince Andrew
supposed.

After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly
seemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called
up from the villaes and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander-in-
chief informin him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the
last extremity and to defend it, leavin to the commander-in-chief's
discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills, where
one of Russia's oldest enerals would be captured or killed, and he
announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.

But while himself remainin, he ave instructions for the departure of
the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Boucharovo and
thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish and
sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not brin herself to
leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey
him. She refused to o away and her father's fury broke over her in a
terrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on
her. Tryin to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused
his quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, makin
it the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her from
his study tellin her that if she did not o away it was all the same to
him. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and
warned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as
she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her
not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof
that in the depth of his soul he was lad she was remainin at home and
had not one away.

The mornin after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his
full uniform and prepared to visit the commander-in-chief. His caleche
was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in
his uniform wearin all his orders and o down the arden to review his
armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listenin to
his voice which reached her from the arden. Suddenly several men came
runnin up the avenue with frihtened faces.

Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, and
into the avenue. A lare crowd of militiamen and domestics were movin
toward her, and in their midst several men were supportin by the
armpits and drain alon a little old man in a uniform and
decorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunliht that
fell in small round spots throuh the shade of the lime-tree avenue,
could not be sure what chane there was in his face. All she could see
was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one
of timidity and submission. On seein his dauhter he moved his helpless
lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out what he
wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the very
couch he had so feared of late.

The doctor, who was fetched that same niht, bled him and said that the
prince had had a seizure paralyzin his riht side.

It was becomin more and more danerous to remain at Bald Hills, and
next day they moved the prince to Boucharovo, the doctor accompanyin
him.

By the time they reached Boucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince
had already left for Moscow.

For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new
house Prince Andrew had built at Boucharovo, ever in the same state,
ettin neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like a
distorted corpse. He muttered unceasinly, his eyebrows and lips
twitchin, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was
oin on around him or not. One thin was certain--that he was sufferin
and wished to say somethin. But what it was, no one could tell: it
miht be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it miht relate
to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.

The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anythin and was due to
physical causes; but Princess Mary thouht he wished to tell her
somethin, and the fact that her presence always increased his
restlessness confirmed her opinion.

He was evidently sufferin both physically and mentally. There was no
hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not do
to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come,
the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thouht. Niht and day, hardly
sleepin at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched him
not with hope of findin sins of improvement but wishin to find
symptoms of the approach of the end.

Strane as it was to her to acknowlede this feelin in herself, yet
there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since
her father's illness bean (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with
him expectin somethin to happen), all the personal desires and hopes
that had been forotten or sleepin within her had awakened. Thouhts
that had not entered her mind for years--thouhts of a life free from
the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of family
happiness--floated continually in her imaination like temptations of
the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually
recurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that.
These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew
that the sole weapon aainst him was prayer, and she tried to pray. She
assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the words
of a prayer, but she could not pray. She felt that a different world had
now taken possession of her--the life of a world of strenuous and free
activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she had
been confined and in which her reatest comfort had been prayer. She
could not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of
her.

It was becomin danerous to remain in Boucharovo. News of the approach
of the French came from all sides, and in one villae, ten miles from
Boucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.

The doctor insisted on the necessity of movin the prince; the
provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary to
persuade her to et away as quickly as possible, and the head of the
rural police havin come to Boucharovo ured the same thin, sayin
that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that French
proclamations were circulatin in the villaes, and that if the princess
did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could not answer
for the consequences.

The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparation
and ivin orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day.
She spent the niht of the fourteenth as usual, without undressin, in
the room next to the one where the prince lay. Several times, wakin up,
she heard his roans and mutterin, the creak of his bed, and the steps
of Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times she
listened at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterins were
louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not
sleep and several times went to the door and listened, wishin to enter
but not decidin to do so. Thouh he did not speak, Princess Mary saw
and knew how unpleasant every sin of anxiety on his account was to him.
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she
sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her oin in durin
the niht at an unusual hour would irritate him.

But never had she felt so rieved for him or so much afraid of losin
him. She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his
found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memories
temptations of the devil would sure into her imaination: thouhts of
how thins would be after his death, and how her new, liberated life
would be ordered. But she drove these thouhts away with disust. Toward
mornin he became quiet and she fell asleep.

She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with wakin showed her
clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On wakin
she listened to what was oin on behind the door and, hearin him
roan, said to herself with a sih that thins were still the same.

"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she
cried with a feelin of loathin for herself.

She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. In
front of it stood carriaes without horses and thins were bein packed
into the vehicles.

It was a warm, ray mornin. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, still
horrified by her spiritual baseness and tryin to arrane her thouhts
before oin to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out to
her.

"He is a little better today," said he. "I was lookin for you. One can
make out somethin of what he is sayin. His head is clearer. Come in,
he is askin for you..."

Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she rew pale
and leaned aainst the wall to keep from fallin. To see him, talk to
him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowin with
those dreadful, wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.

"Come," said the doctor.

Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was
lyin on his back propped up hih, and his small bony hands with their
knotted purple veins were lyin on the quilt; his left eye azed
straiht before him, his riht eye was awry, and his brows and lips
motionless. He seemed altoether so thin, small, and pathetic. His face
seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had rown smaller.
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers so
that she understood that he had lon been waitin for her to come. He
twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered anrily.

She looked at him in dismay tryin to uess what he wanted of her. When
she chaned her position so that his left eye could see her face he
calmed down, not takin his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lips
and tonue moved, sounds came, and he bean to speak, azin timidly and
implorinly at her, evidently afraid that she miht not understand.

Strainin all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic
efforts with which he moved his tonue made her drop her eyes and with
difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said somethin,
repeatin the same words several times. She could not understand them,
but tried to uess what he was sayin and inquirinly repeated the words
he uttered.

"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.

It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thouht
he had uessed them, and inquirinly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?"
The prince shook his head, aain repeated the same sounds.

"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.

He made a mumblin sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, and
bean pressin it to different parts of his breast as if tryin to find
the riht place for it.

"Always thouhts... about you... thouhts..." he then uttered much more
clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of bein
understood.

Princess Mary pressed her head aainst his hand, tryin to hide her sobs
and tears.

He moved his hand over her hair.

"I have been callin you all niht..." he brouht out.

"If only I had known..." she said throuh her tears. "I was afraid to
come in."

He pressed her hand.

"Weren't you asleep?"

"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shakin her head.

Unconsciously imitatin her father, she now tried to express herself as
he did, as much as possible by sins, and her tonue too seemed to move
with difficulty.

"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he
had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender
caressin word such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't you
come in?"

"And I was wishin for his death!" thouht Princess Mary.

He was silent awhile.

"Thank you... dauhter dear!... for all, for all... forive!... thank
you!... forive!... thank you!..." and tears bean to flow from his
eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression
of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.

He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaninless. So at least it
seemed to Princess Mary.

"I have a letter from him," she replied.

He lanced at her with timid surprise.

"Where is he?"

"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."

He closed his eyes and remained silent a lon time. Then as if in answer
to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and
remembered everythin, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.

"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They've
destroyed her."

And he bean to sob, and aain tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Mary
could no loner restrain herself and wept while she azed at his face.

Aain he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and
Tikhon, understandin him, wiped away the tears.

Then he aain opened his eyes and said somethin none of them could
understand for a lon time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeated
it. Princess Mary had souht the meanin of his words in the mood in
which he had just been speakin. She thouht he was speakin of Russia,
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his randson, or of his own death, and
so she could not uess his words.

"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.

Havin understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor
takin her arm led her out to the veranda, soothin her and tryin to
persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the
prince aain bean speakin about his son, about the war, and about the
Emperor, anrily twitchin his brows and raisin his hoarse voice, and
then he had a second and final stroke.

Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and
sunny. She could understand nothin, think of nothin and feel nothin,
except passionate love for her father, love such as she thouht she had
never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbin into the arden and as
far as the pond, alon the avenues of youn lime trees Prince Andrew had
planted.

"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to end
quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me? What
use will peace be when he is no loner here?" Princess Mary murmured,
pacin the arden with hurried steps and pressin her hands to her bosom
which heaved with convulsive sobs.

When she had completed the tour of the arden, which brouht her aain
to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne--who had remained at
Boucharovo and did not wish to leave it--comin toward her with a
straner. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who had
come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her
prompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understandin him; she
led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him. Then,
excusin herself, she went to the door of the old prince's room. The
doctor came out with an aitated face and said she could not enter.

"o away, Princess! o away... o away!"

She returned to the arden and sat down on the rass at the foot of the
slope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how lon
she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman's
footsteps runnin alon the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid,
who was evidently lookin for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in
alarm on seein her mistress.

"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breakin
voice.

"Immediately, I'm comin, I'm comin!" replied the princess hurriedly,
not ivin Dunyasha time to finish what she was sayin, and tryin to
avoid seein the irl she ran toward the house.

"Princess, it's od's will! You must be prepared for everythin," said
the Marshal, meetin her at the house door.

"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried anrily to him.

The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to her
father's door. "Why are these people with frihtened faces stoppin me?
I don't want any of them! And what are they doin here?" she thouht.
She opened the door and the briht dayliht in that previously darkened
room startled her. In the room were her nurse and other women. They all
drew back from the bed, makin way for her. He was still lyin on the
bed as before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess
Mary stop short on the threshold.

"No, he's not dead--it's impossible!" she told herself and approached
him, and repressin the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips to
his cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of the
tenderness she had been feelin for him vanished instantly and was
replaced by a feelin of horror at what lay there before her. "No, he is
no more! He is not, but here where he was is somethin unfamiliar and
hostile, some dreadful, terrifyin, and repellent mystery!" And hidin
her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor,
who held her up.

In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been
the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should
not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied toether the
les that were already spreadin apart. Then they dressed him in uniform
with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table.
Heaven only knows who arraned all this and when, but it all ot done as
if of its own accord. Toward niht candles were burnin round his
coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays of
juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in a
corner of the room sat a chanter readin the psalms.

Just as horses shy and snort and ather about a dead horse, so the
inmates of the house and straners crowded into the drawin room round
the coffin--the Marshal, the villae Elder, peasant women--and all with
fixed and frihtened eyes, crossin themselves, bowed and kissed the old
prince's cold and stiffened hand.




CHAPTER IX

Until Prince Andrew settled in Boucharovo its owners had always been
absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character from
those of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, and
disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used to
approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills
to help with the harvest or to di ponds, and ditches, but he disliked
them for their boorishness.

Prince Andrew's last stay at Boucharovo, when he introduced hospitals
and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had not
softened their disposition but had on the contrary strenthened in them
the traits of character the old prince called boorishness. Various
obscure rumors were always current amon them: at one time a rumor that
they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new reliion to
which they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of the
Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with which
it was rumored that freedom had been ranted them but the landowners had
stopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne in seven
years' time, when everythin would be made free and so "simple" that
there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his
invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vaue
notions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."

In the vicinity of Boucharovo were lare villaes belonin to the
crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they
pleased. There were very few resident landlords in the neihborhood and
also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of the
peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of the
Russian people, the causes and meanin of which are so bafflin to
contemporaries, were more clearly and stronly noticeable than amon
others. One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was a
movement amon the peasants to emirate to some unknown "warm rivers."
Hundreds of peasants, amon them the Boucharovo folk, suddenly bean
sellin their cattle and movin in whole families toward the southeast.
As birds mirate to somewhere beyond the sea, so these men with their
wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of
them had ever been. They set off in caravans, bouht their freedom one
by one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers." Many
of them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold and
huner on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movement
died down of itself just as it had sprun up, without apparent reason.
But such undercurrents still existed amon the people and athered new
forces ready to manifest themselves just as stranely, unexpectedly, and
at the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone
livin in close touch with these people it was apparent that these
undercurrents were actin stronly and nearin an eruption.

Alpatych, who had reached Boucharovo shortly before the old prince's
death, noticed an aitation amon the peasants, and that contrary to
what was happenin in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius of
forty miles all the peasants were movin away and leavin their villaes
to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe reion
round Boucharovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,
received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand, and did not
mirate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant
Karp, who possessed reat influence in the villae commune and had
recently been away drivin a overnment transport, had returned with
news that the Cossacks were destroyin deserted villaes, but that the
French did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day
another peasant had even brouht from the villae of Visloukhovo, which
was occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French eneral that no
harm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would
be paid for anythin taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had
brouht from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know that
they were false) paid to him in advance for hay.

More important still, Alpatych learned that on the mornin of the very
day he ave the villae Elder orders to collect carts to move the
princess' luae from Boucharovo, there had been a villae meetin at
which it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no time
to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death, the
Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leavin at once, as it was
becomin danerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth he could
not be responsible for what miht happen. On the evenin of the day the
old prince died the Marshal went away, promisin to return next day for
the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for he received tidins that
the French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely time to remove his
own family and valuables from his estate.

For some thirty years Boucharovo had been manaed by the villae Elder,
Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."

Dron was one of those physically and mentally viorous peasants who row
bi beards as soon as they are of ae and o on unchaned till they are
sixty or seventy, without a ray hair or the loss of a tooth, as
straiht and stron at sixty as at thirty.

Soon after the miration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken
part like the rest, Dron was made villae Elder and overseer of
Boucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably for twenty-
three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their master.
The masters, both the old prince and the youn, and the steward
respected him and jestinly called him "the Minister." Durin the whole
time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after
sleepless nihts or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatiue,
and thouh he could not read he had never forotten a sinle money
account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless
cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a sinle shock of the whole corn
crop on any sinle acre of the Boucharovo fields.

Alpatych, arrivin from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his
Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelve
horses ot ready for the princess' carriaes and eihteen carts for the
thins to be removed from Boucharovo. Thouh the peasants paid
quitrent, Alpatych thouht no difficulty would be made about complyin
with this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at
work in Boucharovo and the peasants were well to do. But on hearin the
order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent. Alpatych named certain
peasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.

Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away cartin.
Alpatych named others, but they too, accordin to Dron, had no horses
available: some horses were cartin for the overnment, others were too
weak, and others had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses
could be had even for the carriaes, much less for the cartin.

Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a model
villae Elder, so Alpatych had not manaed the prince's estates for
twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessin in the hihest
deree the faculty of divinin the needs and instincts of those he dealt
with. Havin lanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did
not express his personal views but the eneral mood of the Boucharovo
commune, by which the Elder had already been carried away. But he also
knew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,
must be hesitatin between the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'.
He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and therefore frowned and
moved closer up to him.

"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His
excellency Prince Andrew himself ave me orders to move all the people
away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from the
Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do you
hear?"

"I hear," Dron answered without liftin his eyes.

Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.

"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shakin his head.

"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.

"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawin his hand from his
bosom and solemnly pointin to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see
throuh you and three yards into the round under you," he continued,
azin at the floor in front of Dron.

Dron was disconcerted, lanced furtively at Alpatych and aain lowered
his eyes.

"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to et ready to leave their
homes and o to Moscow and to et carts ready for tomorrow mornin for
the princess' thins. And don't o to any meetin yourself, do you
hear?"

Dron suddenly fell on his knees.

"Yakov Alpatych, dischare me! Take the keys from me and dischare me,
for Christ's sake!"

"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see throuh you and three yards
under you," he repeated, knowin that his skill in beekeepin, his
knowlede of the riht time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had
been able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years had lon
since ained him the reputation of bein a wizard, and that the power of
seein three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.

Dron ot up and was about to say somethin, but Alpatych interrupted
him.

"What is it you have ot into your heads, eh?... What are you thinkin
of, eh?"

"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite beside
themselves; I have already told them..."

"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinkin?" he asked
abruptly.

"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched another
barrel."

"Well, then, listen! I'll o to the police officer, and you tell them
so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be ot ready."

"I understand."

Alpatych did not insist further. He had manaed people for a lon time
and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicion
that they can possibly disobey. Havin wrun a submissive "I understand"
from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, thouh he not only
doubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the
carts would not be forthcomin.

And so it was, for when evenin came no carts had been provided. In the
villae, outside the drink shop, another meetin was bein held, which
decided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the
carts should not be provided. Without sayin anythin of this to the
princess, Alpatych had his own belonins taken out of the carts which
had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses ot ready for the
princess' carriaes. Meanwhile he went himself to the police
authorities.




CHAPTER X

After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and
did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych was
askin for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk with
Dron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been
lyin and replied throuh the closed door that she did not mean to o
away and beed to be left in peace.

The windows of the room in which she was lyin looked westward. She lay
on the sofa with her face to the wall, finerin the buttons of the
leather cushion and seein nothin but that cushion, and her confused
thouhts were centered on one subject--the irrevocability of death and
her own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which had
shown itself durin her father's illness. She wished to pray but did not
dare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to od.
She lay for a lon time in that position.

The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slantin rays
shone into the open window, lihtin up the room and part of the morocco
cushion at which Princess Mary was lookin. The flow of her thouhts
suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, ot up,
and went to the window, involuntarily inhalin the freshness of the
clear but windy evenin.

"Yes, you can well enjoy the evenin now! He is one and no one will
hinder you," she said to herself, and sinkin into a chair she let her
head fall on the window sill.

Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the arden and
kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black
dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sihed, kissed
her, and immediately bean to cry. The princess looked up at her. All
their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind. But
she remembered too how he had chaned of late toward Mademoiselle
Bourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showin how unjust were
the reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides, is
it for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?" she
thouht.

Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of Mademoiselle
Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet was
dependent on her and livin in her house. She felt sorry for her and
held out her hand with a lance of entle inquiry. Mademoiselle
Bourienne at once bean cryin aain and kissed that hand, speakin of
the princess' sorrow and makin herself a partner in it. She said her
only consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share her
sorrow, that all the old misunderstandins should sink into nothin but
this reat rief; that she felt herself blameless in reard to everyone,
and that he, from above, saw her affection and ratitude. The princess
heard her, not heedin her words but occasionally lookin up at her and
listenin to the sound of her voice.

"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle
Bourienne after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot,
think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... Has
Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of oin away?" she asked.

Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to o or
where to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anythin now? Is it not
all the same?" she thouht, and did not reply.

"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are in
daner--are surrounded by the French. It would be danerous to move now.
If we o we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and od knows..."

Princess Mary looked at her companion without understandin what she was
talkin about.

"Oh, if anyone knew how little anythin matters to me now," she said.
"Of course I would on no account wish to o away from him.... Alpatych
did say somethin about oin.... Speak to him; I can do nothin,
nothin, and don't want to...."

"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to et away tomorrow,
but I think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle
Bourienne. "Because, you will aree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands
of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible."

Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (not
printed on ordinary Russian paper) of eneral Rameau's, tellin people
not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford
them proper protection. She handed this to the princess.

"I think it would be best to appeal to that eneral," she continued,
"and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you."

Princess Mary read the paper, and her face bean to quiver with stifled
sobs.

"From whom did you et this?" she asked.

"They probably reconized that I am French, by my name," replied
Mademoiselle Bourienne blushin.

Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with
a pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's
study.

"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said,
"and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearin
Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must o at once, at once!" she said,
appalled at the thouht of bein left in the hands of the French.

"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That I,
the dauhter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked eneral Rameau for
protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her
shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of aner and pride as she had never
experienced before. All that was distressin, and especially all that
was humiliatin, in her position rose vividly to her mind. "They, the
French, would settle in this house: M. le eneral Rameau would occupy
Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by lookin throuh and readin
his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors of
Boucharovo for him. I should be iven a small room as a favor, the
soldiers would violate my father's newly du rave to steal his crosses
and stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and
would pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thouht Princess Mary,
not thinkin her own thouhts but feelin bound to think like her father
and her brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or what
happened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her dead
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thouht their thouhts
and felt their feelins. What they would have said and what they would
have done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew's
study, tryin to enter completely into his ideas, and considered her
position.

The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's
death, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown force
and took possession of her.

Aitated and flushed she paced the room, sendin now for Michael
Ivanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other
maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was
correct. Alpatych was not at home, he had one to the police. Neither
could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on bein sent for came in
with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anythin. With just the same smile
of areement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to
answer the old prince without expressin views of his own, he now
replied to Princess Mary, so that nothin definite could be ot from his
answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the
stamp of inconsolable rief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all Princess
Mary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbin as he looked at her.

At lenth Dron, the villae Elder, entered the room and with a deep bow
to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.

Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.

"Dronushka," she said, reardin as a sure friend this Dronushka who
always used to brin a special kind of inerbread from his visit to the
fair at Vyazma every year and smilinly offer it to her, "Dronushka, now
since our misfortune..." she bean, but could not o on.

"We are all in od's hands," said he, with a sih.

They were silent for a while.

"Dronushka, Alpatych has one off somewhere and I have no one to turn
to. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even o away?"

"Why shouldn't you o away, your excellency? You can o," said Dron.

"I was told it would be danerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I
can do nothin. I understand nothin. I have nobody! I want to o away
toniht or early tomorrow mornin."

Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are no
horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."

"Why are there none?" asked the princess.

"It's all od's scoure," said Dron. "What horses we had have been taken
for the army or have died--this is such a year! It's not a case of
feedin horses--we may die of huner ourselves! As it is, some o three
days without eatin. We've nothin, we've been ruined."

Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.

"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.

"They're dyin of huner," said Dron. "It's not a case of cartin."

"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them?
I'll do all I can...."

To Princess Mary it was strane that now, at a moment when such sorrow
was fillin her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the rich
could refrain from helpin the poor. She had heard vauely that there
was such a thin as "landlord's corn" which was sometimes iven to the
peasants. She also knew that neither her father nor her brother would
refuse to help the peasants in need, she only feared to make some
mistake in speakin about the distribution of the rain she wished to
ive. She was lad such cares presented themselves, enablin her without
scruple to foret her own rief. She bean askin Dron about the
peasants' needs and what there was in Boucharovo that beloned to the
landlord.

"But we have rain belonin to my brother?" she said.

"The landlord's rain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince
did not order it to be sold."

"ive it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I ive you leave
in my brother's name," said she.

Dron made no answer but sihed deeply.

"ive them that corn if there is enouh of it. Distribute it all. I ive
this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours is
theirs. We do not rude them anythin. Tell them so."

Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speakin.

"Dischare me, little mother, for od's sake! Order the keys to be taken
from me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done no
wron. Dischare me, for od's sake!"

Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he was
askin to be dischared. She replied that she had never doubted his
devotion and that she was ready to do anythin for him and for the
peasants.




CHAPTER XI

An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, and
all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and
wished to have word with their mistress.

"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dron
to let them have the rain."

"Only, for od's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't o
out to them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych
returns let us et away... and please don't..."

"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.

"I know it is, only listen to me for od's sake! Ask nurse too. They say
they don't aree to leave Boucharovo as you ordered."

"You're makin some mistake. I never ordered them to o away," said
Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."

Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by the
princess' order.

"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have iven
my messae wron. I only said that you were to ive them the rain."

Dron only sihed in reply.

"If you order it they will o away," said he.

"No, no. I'll o out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of the
nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,
Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich followin her.

"They probably think I am offerin them the rain to bribe them to
remain here, while I myself o away leavin them to the mercy of the
French," thouht Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations and
housin at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in my
place," she thouht as she went out in the twiliht toward the crowd
standin on the pasture by the barn.

The men crowded closer toether, stirred, and rapidly took off their
hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, trippin over her skirt, came
close up to them. So many different eyes, old and youn, were fixed on
her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not
distinuish any of them and, feelin that she must speak to them all at
once, did not know how to do it. But aain the sense that she
represented her father and her brother ave her courae, and she boldly
bean her speech.

"I am very lad you have come," she said without raisin her eyes, and
feelin her heart beatin quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me
that the war has ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I shall
rude nothin to help you. I am myself oin away because it is
danerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am ivin you
everythin, my friends, and I be you to take everythin, all our rain,
so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I am
ivin you the rain to keep you here--that is not true. On the
contrary, I ask you to o with all your belonins to our estate near
Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want for
nothin. You shall be iven food and lodin."

The princess stopped. Sihs were the only sound heard in the crowd.

"I am not doin this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the
name of my dead father, who was a ood master to you, and of my brother
and his son."

Aain she paused. No one broke the silence.

"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it toether. All that is
mine is yours," she concluded, scannin the faces before her.

All eyes were azin at her with one and the same expression. She could
not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, ratitude, or
apprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces was
identical.

"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us to
take the landlord's rain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.

"But why not?" asked the princess.

No one replied and Princess Mary, lookin round at the crowd, found that
every eye she met now was immediately dropped.

"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked aain.

No one answered.

The silence bean to oppress the princess and she tried to catch
someone's eye.

"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just in
front of her leanin on his stick. "If you think somethin more is
wanted, tell me! I will do anythin," said she, catchin his eye.

But as if this anered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:

"Why should we aree? We don't want the rain."

"Why should we ive up everythin? We don't aree. Don't aree.... We
are sorry for you, but we're not willin. o away yourself, alone..."
came from various sides of the crowd.

And aain all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,
thouh now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or ratitude,
but of anry resolve.

"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile.
"Why don't you want to o? I promise to house and feed you, while here
the enemy would ruin you..."

But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.

"We're not willin. Let them ruin us! We won't take your rain. We don't
aree."

Aain Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a sinle eye
in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all tryin to avoid
her look. She felt strane and awkward.

"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your houses
and o into bondae! I dare say! 'I'll ive you rain, indeed!' she
says," voices in the crowd were heard sayin.

With droopin head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to the
house. Havin repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for her
departure next mornin, she went to her room and remained alone with her
own thouhts.




CHAPTER XII

For a lon time that niht Princess Mary sat by the open window of her
room hearin the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from the
villae, but it was not of them she was thinkin. She felt that she
could not understand them however much she miht think about them. She
thouht only of one thin, her sorrow, which, after the break caused by
cares for the present, seemed already to belon to the past. Now she
could remember it and weep or pray.

After sunset the wind had dropped. The niht was calm and fresh. Toward
midniht the voices bean to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon bean
to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist bean to
rise, and stillness reined over the villae and the house.

Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments--rose
one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now linered
over these imaes, repellin with horror only the last one, the picture
of his death, which she felt she could not contemplate even in
imaination at this still and mystic hour of niht. And these pictures
presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they
seemed now present, now past, and now future.

She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and was
bein draed alon by his armpits throuh the arden at Bald Hills,
mutterin somethin with his helpless tonue, twitchin his ray
eyebrows and lookin uneasily and timidly at her.

"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," she
thouht. "He had always thouht what he said then." And she recalled in
all its detail the niht at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,
when with a forebodin of disaster she had remained at home aainst his
will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and oin
to the door of the conservatory where he slept that niht had listened
at the door. In a sufferin and weary voice he was sayin somethin to
Tikhon, speakin of the Crimea and its warm nihts and of the Empress.
Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call me? Why didn't
he let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had thouht and
thouht aain now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in his
soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he miht have
said all he loned to say, and not Tikhon but I miht have heard and
understood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thouht. "Perhaps he
would then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talkin
to Tikhon he asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was
standin close by, outside the door. It was sad and painful for him to
talk to Tikhon who did not understand him. I remember how he bean
speakin to him about Lise as if she were alive--he had forotten she
was dead--and Tikhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,
'Fool!' He was reatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how he
lay down on his bed roanin and loudly exclaimed, 'My od!' Why didn't
I o in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? And
perhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that word
to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressin word he had said
to her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and bean
sobbin, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw his face before
her. And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and
had always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen
for the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,
when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.

"Dear-est!" she repeated aain.

"What was he thinkin when he uttered that word? What is he thinkin
now?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer she
saw him before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay in
his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And the
horror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herself
that that was not he, but somethin mysterious and horrible, seized her
aain. She tried to think of somethin else and to pray, but could do
neither. With wide-open eyes she azed at the moonliht and the shadows,
expectin every moment to see his dead face, and she felt that the
silence broodin over the house and within it held her fast.

"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearin
herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meet
her old nurse and the maidservants who came runnin toward her.




CHAPTER XIII

On the seventeenth of Auust Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushka
who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left
their quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Boucharovo, and went for a
ride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bouht and to find out whether there
was any hay to be had in the villaes.

For the last three days Boucharovo had lain between the two hostile
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearuard to et to it as
for the French vanuard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished
to take such provisions as remained at Boucharovo before the French
could et them.

Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to
Boucharovo, a princely estate with a dwellin house and farm where they
hoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty irls, they questioned
Lavrushka about Napoleon and lauhed at his stories, and raced one
another to try Ilyin's horse.

Rostov had no idea that the villae he was enterin was the property of
that very Bolkonski who had been enaed to his sister.

Rostov and Ilyin ave rein to their horses for a last race alon the
incline before reachin Boucharovo, and Rostov, outstrippin Ilyin, was
the first to allop into the villae street.

"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.

"Yes, always first both on the rassland and here," answered Rostov,
strokin his heated Donets horse.

"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka from
behind, alludin to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to
mortify you."

They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a lare crowd of peasants was
standin.

Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
without doffin their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces
and scanty beards emered from the tavern, smilin, staerin, and
sinin some incoherent son, and approached the officers.

"Fine fellows!" said Rostov lauhin. "Is there any hay here?"

"And how like one another," said Ilyin.

"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" san one of the peasants with a
blissful smile.

One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.

"Who do you belon to?" he asked.

"The French," replied Ilyin jestinly, "and here is Napoleon himself"--
and he pointed to Lavrushka.

"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked aain.

"And is there a lare force of you here?" said another, a short man,
comin up.

"Very lare," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he
added. "Is it a holiday?"

"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied
the peasant, movin away.

At that moment, on the road leadin from the bi house, two women and a
man in a white hat were seen comin toward the officers.

"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seein Dunyasha
runnin resolutely toward him.

"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winkin.

"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.

"The princess ordered me to ask your reiment and your name."

"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble
servant."

"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as he
looked at Ilyin talkin to the irl. Followin Dunyasha, Alpatych
advanced to Rostov, havin bared his head while still at a distance.

"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but with
a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a hand
thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, dauhter of eneral in Chief Prince
Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, findin
herself in difficulties owin to the boorishness of these people"--he
pointed to the peasants--"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't
you, please, ride on a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy
smile, "as it is not convenient in the presence of...?" He pointed to
the two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse.

"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... rand! Forive us for Christ's
sake, eh?" said the peasants, smilin joyfully at him.

Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.

"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air,
as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.

"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a
little way. "What's the matter?" he asked.

"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't wish
to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness her
horses, so that thouh everythin has been packed up since mornin, her
excellency cannot et away."

"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.

"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.

Rostov dismounted, ave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych
to the house, questionin him as to the state of affairs. It appeared
that the princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, and
her talk with Dron and at the meetin, had actually had so bad an effect
that Dron had finally iven up the keys and joined the peasants and had
not appeared when Alpatych sent for him; and that in the mornin when
the princess ave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had
come in a lare crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let
her leave the villae: that there was an order not to move, and that
they would unharness the horses. Alpatych had one out to admonish them,
but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talkin, Dron not showin
himself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess o, that
there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would
serve her as before and obey her in everythin.

At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were allopin alon the road,
Princess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and the
maids, had iven orders to harness and intended to start, but when the
cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ran
away, and the women in the house bean to wail.

"Father! Benefactor! od has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as
Rostov passed throuh the anteroom.

Princess Mary was sittin helpless and bewildered in the lare sittin
room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not rasp who he was and why
he had come, or what was happenin to her. When she saw his Russian
face, and by his walk and the first words he uttered reconized him as a
man of her own class, she lanced at him with her deep radiant look and
bean speakin in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. This
meetin immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless irl
overwhelmed with rief, left to the mercy of coarse, riotin peasants!
And what a strane fate sent me here! What entleness and nobility there
are in her features and expression!" thouht he as he looked at her and
listened to her timid story.

When she bean to tell him that all this had happened the day after her
father's funeral, her voice trembled. She turned away, and then, as if
fearin he miht take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at
him with an apprehensive lance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's
eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and lanced ratefully at him with that
radiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forotten.

"I cannot express, Princess, how lad I am that I happened to ride here
and am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, risin. "o
when you please, and I ive you my word of honor that no one shall dare
to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort."
And bowin respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved toward
the door.

Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that thouh he would
consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to
take advantae of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.

Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.

"I am very, very rateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope it
was all a misunderstandin and that no one is to blame for it." She
suddenly bean to cry.

"Excuse me!" she said.

Rostov, knittin his brows, left the room with another low bow.




CHAPTER XIV

"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend--my pink one is delicious; her name is
Dunyasha...."

But on lancin at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his
hero and commander was followin quite a different train of thouht.

Rostov lanced anrily at Ilyin and without replyin strode off with
rapid steps to the villae.

"I'll show them; I'll ive it to them, the briands!" said he to
himself.

Alpatych at a lidin trot, only just manain not to run, kept up with
him with difficulty.

"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.

Rostov stopped and, clenchin his fists, suddenly and sternly turned on
Alpatych.

"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you been
about? Eh? The peasants are riotin, and you can't manae them? You're a
traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as if
afraid of wastin his store of aner, he left Alpatych and went rapidly
forward. Alpatych, masterin his offended feelins, kept pace with
Rostov at a lidin ait and continued to impart his views. He said the
peasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would be
imprudent to "overresist" them without an armed force, and would it not
be better first to send for the military?

"I'll ive them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov
meaninlessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to
vent it.

Without considerin what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,
resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more
Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action miht produce ood results.
The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they saw
Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frownin face.

After the hussars had come to the villae and Rostov had one to see the
princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen amon the crowd.
Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians and
miht take it amiss that the mistress was bein detained. Dron was of
this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attacked
their ex-Elder.

"How many years have you been fattenin on the commune?" Karp shouted at
him. "It's all one to you! You'll di up your pot of money and take it
away with you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes are
ruined or not?"

"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homes
or take away a sinle rain, and that's all about it!" cried another.

"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You beruded
your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly bean attackin Dron--
"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have
to die."

"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not aainst the commune," said
Dron.

"That's it--not aainst it! You've filled your belly...."

The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed by
Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrustin
his finers into his belt and smilin a little, walked to the front.
Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer
toether.

"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, comin up to the crowd
with quick steps.

"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.

But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a
fierce blow jerked his head to one side.

"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's the
Elder?" he cried furiously.

"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek and
flustered voices here and there were heard callin and caps bean to
come off their heads.

"We don't riot, we're followin the orders," declared Karp, and at that
moment several voices bean speakin toether.

"It's as the old men have decided--there's too many of you ivin
orders."

"Aruin? Mutiny!... Briands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaninly in a
voice not his own, rippin Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he
shouted, thouh there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.

Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms from
behind.

"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.

Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to come
and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and bean takin
off their belts.

"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.

With a pale and frownin face Dron stepped out of the crowd.

"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that
order, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.

And in fact two more peasants bean bindin Dron, who took off his own
belt and handed it to them, as if to aid them.

"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your
houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"

"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It's
all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heard
bickerin with one another.


"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, comin into his own aain. "It's
wron, lads!"

"All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the crowd
bean at once to disperse throuh the villae.

The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken
peasants followed them.

"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.

"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinkin of,
you fool?" added the other--"A real fool!"

Two hours later the carts were standin in the courtyard of the
Boucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carryin out the
proprietor's oods and packin them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at
Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was
standin in the yard directin the men.

"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with a
round smilin face, takin a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has
cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord
where it'll et rubbed? I don't like that way of doin thins. Let it
all be done properly, accordin to rule. Look here, put it under the
bast mattin and cover it with hay--that's the way!"

"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, brinin out Prince Andrew's
library cupboards. "Don't catch up aainst it! It's heavy, lads--solid
books."

"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall, round-
faced peasant ravely, pointin with a sinificant wink at the
dictionaries that were on the top.

Unwillin to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not o back to
the house but remained in the villae awaitin her departure. When her
carriae drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eiht
miles from Boucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At
the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first time
permittin himself to kiss her hand.

"How can you speak so!" he blushinly replied to Princess Mary's
expressions of ratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had
occurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had had
only peasants to fiht, we should not have let the enemy come so far,"
said he with a sense of shame and wishin to chane the subject. "I am
only happy to have had the opportunity of makin your acquaintance.
ood-bye, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to
meet you aain in happier circumstances. If you don't want to make me
blush, please don't thank me!"

But the princess, if she did not aain thank him in words, thanked him
with the whole expression of her face, radiant with ratitude and
tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothin to thank him
for. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he not been
there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of the
French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious daner
to save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty and
noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. His kind,
honest eyes, with the tears risin in them when she herself had beun to
cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.

When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her
eyes fillin with tears, and then not for the first time the strane
question presented itself to her: did she love him?

On the rest of the way to Moscow, thouh the princess' position was not
a cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriae, more than
once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at
somethin with an expression of minled joy and sorrow.

"Well, supposin I do love him?" thouht Princess Mary.

Ashamed as she was of acknowledin to herself that she had fallen in
love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself
with the thouht that no one would ever know it and that she would not
be to blame if, without ever speakin of it to anyone, she continued to
the end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love for
the first and last time in her life.

Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,
happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that
Dunyasha noticed her smilin as she looked out of the carriae window.

"Was it not fate that brouht him to Boucharovo, and at that very
moment?" thouht Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse my
brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.

The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very areeable one. To
remember her ave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearin of his
adventure at Boucharovo, rallied him on havin one to look for hay and
havin picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he rew
anry. It made him anry just because the idea of marryin the entle
Princess Mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune,
had aainst his will more than once entered his head. For himself
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marryin her he
would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his
father's affairs in order, and would even--he felt it--ensure Princess
Mary's happiness.

But Sonya? And his plihted word? That was why Rostov rew anry when he
was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.




CHAPTER XV

On receivin command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew and
sent an order for him to report at headquarters.

Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at the
very hour that Kutuzov was reviewin the troops for the first time. He
stopped in the villae at the priest's house in front of which stood the
commander-in-chief's carriae, and he sat down on the bench at the ate
awaitin his Serene Hihness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the
field beyond the villae came now sounds of reimental music and now the
roar of many voices shoutin "Hurrah!" to the new commander-in-chief.
Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten paces
from Prince Andrew, availin themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the
fine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick
mustaches and whiskers rode up to the ate and, lancin at Prince
Andrew, inquired whether his Serene Hihness was puttin up there and
whether he would soon be back.

Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Hihness' staff but
was himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart
orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander-in-
chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:

"What? His Serene Hihness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do you
want?"

The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at the
orderly's tone, dismounted, ave his horse to a dispatch runner, and
approached Bolkonski with a sliht bow. Bolkonski made room for him on
the bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.

"You're also waitin for the commander-in-chief?" said he. "They say he
weceives evewyone, thank od!... It's awful with those sausae eaters!
Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a erman! Now p'waps
Wussians will et a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was
happenin. We kept wetweatin and wetweatin. Did you take part in the
campain?" he asked.

"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of takin part in
the retreat but of losin in that retreat all I held dear--not to
mention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of rief. I
belon to the province of Smolensk."

"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy lad to make your acquaintance! I'm
Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov,
pressin Prince Andrew's hand and lookin into his face with a
particularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically,
and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's all
vewy well--only not for those who et it in the neck. So you are Pwince
Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to make
your acquaintance!" he repeated aain, smilin sadly, and he aain
pressed Prince Andrew's hand.

Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her first
suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painful
feelins of which he had not thouht lately, but which still found place
in his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious
impressions--such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills,
and the recent news of his father's death--and had experienced so many
emotions, that for a lon time past those memories had not entered his
mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly their
former strenth. For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the name of
Bolkonski beloned to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and
after Natasha's sinin he had proposed to a little irl of fifteen
without realizin what he was doin. He smiled at the recollection of
that time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to what now
interested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campain
he had devised while servin at the outposts durin the retreat. He had
proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it to
Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line of
operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or
concurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,
we should attack their line of communication. He bean explainin his
plan to Prince Andrew.

"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to
bweak thwouh. ive me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,
that's certain! There's only one way--uewilla warfare!"

Denisov rose and bean esticulatin as he explained his plan to
Bolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the
army, rowin more incoherent and more diffused, minlin with music and
sons and comin from the field where the review was held. Sounds of
hoofs and shouts were nearin the villae.

"He's comin! He's comin!" shouted a Cossack standin at the ate.

Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the ate, at which a knot of soldiers (a
uard of honor) was standin, and they saw Kutuzov comin down the
street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A hue suite of enerals
rode behind him. Barclay was ridin almost beside him, and a crowd of
officers ran after and around them shoutin, "Hurrah!"

His adjutants alloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatiently
urin on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weiht, and he
raised his hand to his white Horse uard's cap with a red band and no
peak, noddin his head continually. When he came up to the uard of
honor, a fine set of renadiers mostly wearin decorations, who were
ivin him the salute, he looked at them silently and attentively for
nearly a minute with the steady aze of a commander and then turned to
the crowd of enerals and officers surroundin him. Suddenly his face
assumed a subtle expression, he shrued his shoulders with an air of
perplexity.

"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, ood-by,
eneral," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and
Denisov.

"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.

Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had rown still more
corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and the
familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearin
the white Horse uard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanin
over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on
his brisk little horse.

"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into the
yard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who
means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup
and, lurchin with his whole body and puckerin his face with the
effort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee,
roaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants
who stood ready to assist him.

He pulled himself toether, looked round, screwin up his eyes, lanced
at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not reconizin him, moved with his
waddlin ait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, and
aain lanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it was
only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew's
face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.

"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come
alon..." said he, lancin wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch
which creaked under his weiht.

He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.

"And how's your father?"

"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrew
abruptly.

Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off
his cap and crossed himself:

"May the kindom of Heaven be his! od's will be done to us all!" He
sihed deeply, his whole chest heavin, and was silent for a while. "I
loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."

He embraced Prince Andrew, pressin him to his fat breast, and for some
time did not let him o. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that
Kutuzov's flabby lips were tremblin and that tears were in his eyes. He
sihed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself.

"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.

But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than by
the enemy, came with jinlin spurs up the steps of the porch, despite
the anry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his
hands still pressed on the seat, lanced at him lumly. Denisov, havin
iven his name, announced that he had to communicate to his Serene
Hihness a matter of reat importance for their country's welfare.
Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, liftin his hands with a esture of
annoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeatin the words: "For our
country's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Denisov blushed like a irl
(it was strane to see the color rise in that shay, bibulous, time-
worn face) and boldly bean to expound his plan of cuttin the enemy's
lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came from
those parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed decidedly a ood
one, especially from the strenth of conviction with which he spoke.
Kutuzov looked down at his own les, occasionally lancin at the door
of the adjoinin hut as if expectin somethin unpleasant to emere from
it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speakin, a eneral with a
portfolio under his arm really did appear.

"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are you
ready so soon?"

"Ready, your Serene Hihness," replied the eneral.

Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal with
it all?" and aain listened to Denisov.

"I ive my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I
can bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"

"What relation are you to Intendant eneral Kiril Andreevich Denisov?"
asked Kutuzov, interruptin him.

"He is my uncle, your Sewene Hihness."

"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All riht, all riht,
friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."

With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers
Konovnitsyn had brouht him.

"Would not your Serene Hihness like to come inside?" said the eneral
on duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and several
papers have to be sined."

An adjutant came out and announced that everythin was in readiness
within. But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he
was disenaed. He made a rimace...

"No, tell them to brin a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look
at them here," said he. "Don't o away," he added, turnin to Prince
Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the eneral's report.

While this was bein iven, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's
voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times on
lancin that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsome
woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holdin a
dish and evidently awaitin the entrance of the commander-in-chief.
Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene
Hihness bread and salt. "Her husband has welcomed his Serene Hihness
with the cross at the church, and she intends to welcome him in the
house.... She's very pretty," added the adjutant with a smile. At those
words Kutuzov looked round. He was listenin to the eneral's report--
which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at Tsarevo-
Zaymishche--as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years previously
had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war. He
evidently listened only because he had ears which, thouh there was a
piece of tow in one of them, could not help hearin; but it was evident
that nothin the eneral could say would surprise or even interest him,
that he knew all that would be said beforehand, and heard it all only
because he had to, as one has to listen to the chantin of a service of
prayer. All that Denisov had said was clever and to the point. What the
eneral was sayin was even more clever and to the point, but it was
evident that Kutuzov despised knowlede and cleverness, and knew of
somethin else that would decide the matter--somethin independent of
cleverness and knowlede. Prince Andrew watched the commander-in-chief's
face attentively, and the only expression he could see there was one of
boredom, curiosity as to the meanin of the feminine whisperin behind
the door, and a desire to observe propriety. It was evident that Kutuzov
despised cleverness and learnin and even the patriotic feelin shown by
Denisov, but despised them not because of his own intellect, feelins,
or knowlede--he did not try to display any of these--but because of
somethin else. He despised them because of his old ae and experience
of life. The only instruction Kutuzov ave of his own accord durin that
report referred to lootin by the Russian troops. At the end of the
report the eneral put before him for sinature a paper relatin to the
recovery of payment from army commanders for reen oats mown down by the
soldiers, when landowners loded petitions for compensation.

After hearin the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips toether and shook
his head.

"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my
dear fellow," said he, "into the fire with all such thins! Let them cut
the crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it or
allow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can't et on
without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" He looked at the
paper aain. "Oh, this erman precision!" he muttered, shakin his head.




CHAPTER XVI

"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he sined the last of the documents,
and risin heavily and smoothin out the folds in his fat white neck he
moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.

The priest's wife, flushin rosy red, cauht up the dish she had after
all not manaed to present at the riht moment, thouh she had so lon
been preparin for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.

He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:

"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"

He took some old pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the
dish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we ettin on?" he asked,
movin to the door of the room assined to him. The priest's wife
smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.
The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch with
him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was aain called to Kutuzov. He
found him reclinin in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned
overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince
Andrew entered, markin the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the
cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cyne by Madame de enlis.

"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It's
sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,
a second father...."

Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and what
he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed throuh it.

"What... what they have brouht us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an
aitated voice, evidently picturin vividly to himself from Prince
Andrew's story the condition Russia was in. "But ive me time, ive me
time!" he said with a rim look, evidently not wishin to continue this
aitatin conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you with me."

"I thank your Serene Hihness, but I fear I am no loner fit for the
staff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.

Kutuzov lanced inquirinly at him.

"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have rown used to my reiment,
am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should be
sorry to leave the reiment. If I decline the honor of bein with you,
believe me..."

A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's pody
face. He cut Bolkonski short.

"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're riht, you're riht! It's not
here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men are
not. The reiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisers
served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,
yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of
pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face at this recollection.

Takin his hand and drawin him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to
be kissed, and aain Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes.
Thouh Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that he
was particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to show
sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was both
pleasant and flatterin to him.

"o your way and od be with you. I know your path is the path of
honor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone to
send." And chanin the subject, Kutuzov bean to speak of the Turkish
war and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much
blamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everythin
came at the riht time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. *
And there were as many advisers there as here..." he went on, returnin
to the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him. "Ah, those
advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we should not have
made peace with Turkey and should not have been throuh with that war.
Everythin in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would have
been lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand
men. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to
win a campain. For that, not stormin and attackin but patience and
time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employed
these two thins and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made them
Turks eat horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too,
believe me," he went on, rowin warmer and beatin his chest, "I'll
make them eat horseflesh!" And tears aain dimmed his eyes.


* "Everythin comes in time to him who knows how to wait."

"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.

"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe me,
my dear boy, there is nothin stroner than those two: patience and
time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette
oreille, voila le mal. * Some want a thin--others don't. What's one to
do?" he asked, evidently expectin an answer. "Well, what do you want us
to do?" he repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look. "I'll
tell you what to do," he continued, as Prince Andrew still did not
reply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, mon
cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)--he articulated the French proverb
deliberately.


* "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."

* (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothin."

"Well, ood-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I share
your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Hihness, nor a prince,
nor a commander-in-chief, but a father! If you want anythin come
straiht to me. ood-bye, my dear boy."

Aain he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter had
left the room Kutuzov ave a sih of relief and went on with his
unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cyne by Madame de enlis.

Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after that
interview with Kutuzov he went back to his reiment reassured as to the
eneral course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been
entrusted. The more he realized the absence of all personal motive in
that old man--in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions,
and in place of an intellect (roupin events and drawin conclusions)
only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events--the more
reassured he was that everythin would be as it should. "He will not
brin in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake anythin,"
thouht Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everythin, remember
everythin, and put everythin in its place. He will not hinder anythin
useful nor allow anythin harmful. He understands that there is
somethin stroner and more important than his own will--the inevitable
course of events, and he can see them and rasp their sinificance, and
seein that sinificance can refrain from meddlin and renounce his
personal wish directed to somethin else. And above all," thouht Prince
Andrew, "one believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel by
enlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when he
said: 'What they have brouht us to!' and had a sob in it when he said
he would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"

On such feelins, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and
eneral approval were founded with which, despite court influences, the
popular choice of Kutuzov as commander-in-chief was received.




CHAPTER XVII

After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual
course, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to
remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believe
that Russia was really in daner and that the members of the Enlish
Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everythin for
it. The one thin that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had
displayed durin the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions of
men and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made
assumed a leal, official form and became unavoidable.

With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of their
situation did not row more serious but on the contrary became even more
frivolous, as always happens with people who see a reat daner
approachin. At the approach of daner there are always two voices that
speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably tells a
man to consider the nature of the daner and the means of escapin it;
the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressin and
painful to think of the daner, since it is not in man's power to
foresee everythin and avert the eneral course of events, and it is
therefore better to disreard what is painful till it comes, and to
think about what is pleasant. In solitude a man enerally listens to the
first voice, but in society to the second. So it was now with the
inhabitants of Moscow. It was lon since people had been as ay in
Moscow as that year.

Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,
and a Moscow burher called Karpushka Chiirin, "who--havin been a
militiaman and havin had rather too much at the pub--heard that
Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, rew anry, abused the French in very
bad lanuae, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sin of the
eale, bean to address the assembled people," were read and discussed,
toether with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.

In the corner room at the club, members athered to read these
broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,
sayin: "They will swell up with Russian cabbae, burst with our
buckwheat porride, and choke themselves with cabbae soup. They are all
dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork."
Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vular. It was
said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and even all foreiners
from Moscow, and that there had been some spies and aents of Napoleon
amon them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchin's witty
remark on that occasion. The foreiners were deported to Nizhni by boat,
and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrez
dans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." * There was
talk of all the overnment offices havin been already removed from
Moscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added--that for that alone
Moscow ouht to be rateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's
reiment would cost him eiht hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov
had spent even more on his, but that the best thin about Bezukhov's
action was that he himself was oin to don a uniform and ride at the
head of his reiment without charin anythin for the show.


* "Think it over; et into the barque, and take care not to make it a
barque of Charon."

"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected and
pressed toether a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, berined
finers.

Julie was preparin to leave Moscow next day and was ivin a farewell
soiree.

"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and ood-natured. What
pleasure is there to be so caustique?"

"A forfeit!" cried a youn man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon
chevalier," and who was oin with her to Nizhni.

In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been areed
that they would speak nothin but Russian and that those who made a slip
and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of Voluntary
Contributions.

"Another forfeit for a allicism," said a Russian writer who was
present. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"

"You spare no one," continued Julie to the youn man without heedin the
author's remark.

"For caustique--I am uilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay aain
for the pleasure of tellin you the truth. For allicisms I won't be
responsible," she remarked, turnin to the author: "I have neither the
money nor the time, like Prince alitsyn, to enae a master to teach me
Russian!"

"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to the
militia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see its
rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talkin of you,"
she said with the facility in lyin natural to a society woman. "We were
sayin that your reiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."

"Oh, don't talk to me of my reiment," replied Pierre, kissin his
hostess' hand and takin a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."

"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directin a sly,
sarcastic lance toward the militia officer.

The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face
expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile miht mean. In spite of
his absent-mindedness and ood nature, Pierre's personality immediately
checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.

"No," said Pierre, with a lauhin lance at his bi, stout body. "I
should make too ood a taret for the French, besides I am afraid I
should hardly be able to climb onto a horse."

Amon those whom Julie's uests happened to choose to ossip about were
the Rostovs.

"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he
is so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted to
buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it dras on and on. He
asks too much."

"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone.
"Thouh it is madness to buy anythin in Moscow now."

"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in daner?"

"Then why are you leavin?"

"I? What a question! I am oin because... well, because everyone is
oin: and besides--I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."

"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."

"If he manaes the business properly he will be able to pay off all his
debts," said the militia officer, speakin of Rostov.

"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so lon in
Moscow? They meant to leave for the country lon ao. Natalie is quite
well aain now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowin smile.

"They are waitin for their youner son," Pierre replied. "He joined
Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the reiment is
bein formed. But now they have had him transferred to my reiment and
are expectin him every day. The count wanted to leave lon ao, but the
countess won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."

"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has
recovered her looks and is brihter. She san a son. How easily some
people et over everythin!"

"et over what?" inquired Pierre, lookin displeased.

Julie smiled.

"You know, Count, such knihts as you are only found in Madame de
Souza's novels."

"What knihts? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushin.

"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire,
ma parole d'honneur!" *


* "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"

"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.

"All riht, one can't talk--how tiresome!"

"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked anrily, risin to his
feet.

"Come now, Count, you know!"

"I don't know anythin about it," said Pierre.

"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more
friendly with Vera--that dear Vera."

"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not
taken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's kniht at all, and have
not been to their house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the
cruelty..."

"Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smilin and wavin the lint
triumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly chaned the
subject. "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived
in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her father?"


* "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."

"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.

"I spent the evenin with her yesterday. She is oin to their estate
near Moscow either today or tomorrow mornin, with her nephew."

"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.

"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a
romance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill
her and had wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her...."

"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this eneral
fliht has been arraned to et all the old maids married off. Catiche
is one and Princess Bolkonskaya another."

"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune
homme." *


* "A little bit in love with the youn man."

"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"

"But how could one say that in Russian?"




CHAPTER XVIII

When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets
that had been brouht that day.

The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden
people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was lad that
ladies and tradesmen's wives were leavin the city. "There will be less
panic and less ossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life on
it that scoundrel will not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierre
clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. The
second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma, that
Count Wittenstein had defeated the French, but that as many of the
inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them at
the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a low
price. The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the former
Chiirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Evidently the
terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strenth of his soul
but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawin near.

"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself
for the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table
and bean to lay them out for a ame of patience.

"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shufflin the
cards, holdin them in his hand, and liftin his head, "if it comes out,
it means... what does it mean?"

He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of the
eldest princess at the door askin whether she miht come in.

"Then it will mean that I must o to the army," said Pierre to himself.
"Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.

Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and lon waist,
was still livin in Pierre's house. The two youner ones had both
married.

"Excuse my comin to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful and
aitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is oin
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are riotin. How is
it that we are stayin on?"

"On the contrary, thins seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre in
the banterin tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feelin
uncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.

"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me today
how our troops are distinuishin themselves. It certainly does them
credit! And the people too are quite mutinous--they no loner obey, even
my maid has taken to bein rude. At this rate they will soon bein
beatin us. One can't walk in the streets. But, above all, the French
will be here any day now, so what are we waitin for? I ask just one
thin of you, cousin," she went on, "arrane for me to be taken to
Petersbur. Whatever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's rule."

"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you et your information from? On the
contrary..."

"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If you
don't want to do this..."

"But I will, I'll ive the order at once."

The princess was apparently vexed at not havin anyone to be anry with.
Mutterin to herself, she sat down on a chair.

"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everythin is quiet in
the city and there is not the slihtest daner. See! I've just been
readin..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes that
he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow."

"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a
hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't he
write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it miht be,
should be draed to the lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honor
and lory to whoever captures him,' he says. This is what his cajolery
has brouht us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed her
because she said somethin in French."

"Oh, but it's so... You take everythin so to heart," said Pierre, and
bean layin out his cards for patience.

Althouh that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army, but
remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of aitation,
irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expectin
somethin terrible.

Next day toward evenin the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward
came to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of his
reiment could not be found without sellin one of the estates. In
eneral the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raisin
a reiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcely able to
repress a smile.

"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw back
now!"

The worse everythin became, especially his own affairs, the better was
Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe he
expected was approachin. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie
had one, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the
Rostovs remained, but he did not o to see them.

To distract his thouhts he drove that day to the villae of Vorontsovo
to see the reat balloon Leppich was constructin to destroy the foe,
and a trial balloon that was to o up next day. The balloon was not yet
ready, but Pierre learned that it was bein constructed by the Emperor's
desire. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:

As soon as Leppich is ready, et toether a crew of reliable and
intellient men for his car and send a courier to eneral Kutuzov to let
him know. I have informed him of the matter.

Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the
first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's
hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with those of
the commander-in-chief.

On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passin the Bolotnoe Place
Pierre, seein a lare crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and ot out
of his trap. A French cook accused of bein a spy was bein floed. The
floin was only just over, and the executioner was releasin from the
floin bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockins and a
reen jacket, who was moanin piteously. Another criminal, thin and
pale, stood near. Judin by their faces they were both Frenchmen. With
a frihtened and sufferin look resemblin that on the thin Frenchman's
face, Pierre pushed his way in throuh the crowd.

"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept askin.

But the attention of the crowd--officials, burhers, shopkeepers,
peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses--was so eaerly centered
on what was passin in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout
man rose, frowned, shrued his shoulders, and evidently tryin to
appear firm bean to pull on his jacket without lookin about him, but
suddenly his lips trembled and he bean to cry, in the way full-blooded
rown-up men cry, thouh anry with himself for doin so. In the crowd
people bean talkin loudly, to stifle their feelins of pity as it
seemed to Pierre.

"He's cook to some prince."

"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his
teeth on ede!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standin behind Pierre,
when the Frenchman bean to cry.

The clerk lanced round, evidently hopin that his joke would be
appreciated. Some people bean to lauh, others continued to watch in
dismay the executioner who was undressin the other man.

Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went back
to his trap mutterin somethin to himself as he went, and took his
seat. As they drove alon he shuddered and exclaimed several times so
audibly that the coachman asked him:

"What is your pleasure?"

"Where are you oin?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was drivin to
Lubyanka Street.

"To the overnor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.

"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusin his coachman--a thin he rarely
did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must et away
this very day," he murmured to himself.

At the siht of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surroundin the
Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could no
loner remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day that
it seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that the
man ouht to have known it for himself.

On reachin home Pierre ave orders to Evstafey--his head coachman who
knew everythin, could do anythin, and was known to all Moscow--that he
would leave that niht for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddle
horses should be sent there. This could not all be arraned that day, so
on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his departure till
next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.

On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and
after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When chanin horses that niht in
Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a reat battle that
evenin. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that there in
Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firin, but nobody could answer
his questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre was approachin
Mozhaysk.

Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostel
where Pierre was met by his room and coachman there was no room to be
had. It was full of officers.

Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on the
march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, waons, caissons, and cannon
were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and the
farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he pluned into that sea of
troops the more was he overcome by restless aitation and a new and
joyful feelin he had not experienced before. It was a feelin akin to
what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace durin the Emperor's visit--a
sense of the necessity of undertakin somethin and sacrificin
somethin. He now experienced a lad consciousness that everythin that
constitutes men's happiness--the comforts of life, wealth, even life
itself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with
somethin... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to
determine for whom and for what he felt such particular deliht in
sacrificin everythin. He was not occupied with the question of what to
sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificin in itself afforded him a new and
joyous sensation.




CHAPTER XIX

On the twenty-fourth of Auust the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was
fouht, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and on
the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.

Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino iven and
accepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fouht? There was not the least
sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result
for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brouht nearer
to the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than anythin in the
world; and for the French its immediate result was that they were
brouht nearer to the destruction of their whole army--which they feared
more than anythin in the world. What the result must be was quite
obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.

If the commanders had been uided by reason, it would seem that it must
have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancin thirteen hundred miles
and ivin battle with a probability of losin a quarter of his army, he
was advancin to certain destruction, and it must have been equally
clear to Kutuzov that by acceptin battle and riskin the loss of a
quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this was
mathematically clear, as it is that if when playin drauhts I have one
man less and o on exchanin, I shall certainly lose, and therefore
should not exchane. When my opponent has sixteen men and I have
fourteen, I am only one eihth weaker than he, but when I have exchaned
thirteen more men he will be three times as stron as I am.

Before the battle of Borodino our strenth in proportion to the French
was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more than
one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand aainst a hundred and
twenty thousand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand aainst a
hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the
battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of enius, ave
it, losin a quarter of his army and lenthenin his lines of
communication still more. If it is said that he expected to end the
campain by occupyin Moscow as he had ended a previous campain by
occupyin Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon's
historians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished to
stop, knew the daner of his extended position, and knew that the
occupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campain, for he had
seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, and
had not received a sinle reply to his repeated announcements of his
wish to neotiate.

In ivin and acceptin battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarily
and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historians
provided cunninly devised evidence of the foresiht and enius of the
enerals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved
and involuntary.

The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish
the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom
ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are
meaninless.

On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the precedin
battle of Shevardino were fouht, there also exists a definite and well-
known, but quite false, conception. All the historians describe the
affair as follows:

The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk souht out for
itself the best position for a eneral enaement and found such a
position at Borodino.

The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the left
of the hihroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a riht anle to
it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle was
fouht.

In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up on
the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we are
told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the
twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on
the field of Borodino.

So the histories say, and it is all quite wron, as anyone who cares to
look into the matter can easily convince himself.

The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,
durin the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They did
not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to
occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demand
for a battle had not yet expressed itself stronly enouh, and because
Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other
reasons. The fact is that other positions they had passed were stroner,
and that the position at Borodino (the one where the battle was fouht),
far from bein stron, was no more a position than any other spot one
miht find in the Russian Empire by stickin a pin into the map at
hazard.

Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of
Borodino to the left of, and at a riht anle to, the hihroad (that is,
the position on which the battle took place), but never till the twenty-
fifth of Auust, 1812, did they think that a battle miht be fouht
there. This was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchments
there by the twenty fifth and that those beun on the twenty-fifth and
twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the position of the
Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless in front of the
position where the battle was accepted. Why was it more stronly
fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts exhausted and
six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at niht on the
twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the
enemy. Thirdly, as proof that the position on which the battle was
fouht had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt was not an
advanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to the twenty-
fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Baration were convinced that the Shevardino
Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov himself in
his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of the
Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much later,
when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the
incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to justify
the mistakes of a commander-in-chief who had to be represented as
infallible) that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas in
reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank--and that the
battle of Borodino was fouht by us on an entrenched position previously
selected, where as it was fouht on a quite unexpected spot which was
almost unentrenched.

The case was evidently this: a position was selected alon the river
Kolocha--which crosses the hihroad not at a riht anle but at an acute
anle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the riht flank near
the villae of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at the confluence of
the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.

To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinkin of how the
battle was actually fouht, this position, protected by the river
Kolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to
prevent an enemy from advancin alon the Smolensk road to Moscow.

Napoleon, ridin to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as the
history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa to
Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did not
exist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while
pursuin the Russian rearuard he came upon the left flank of the
Russian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for the
Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians, not havin
time to bein a eneral enaement, withdrew their left win from the
position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which
had not been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossin to the other
side of the Kolocha to the left of the hihroad, Napoleon shifted the
whole forthcomin battle from riht to left (lookin from the Russian
side) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, and
Borodino--a plain no more advantaeous as a position than any other
plain in Russia--and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of
Auust took place.

Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evenin of the twenty-fourth to the
Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt
but had beun the attack next mornin, no one would have doubted that
the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and the
battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case we
should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt--our left flank--
still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the center
or on the riht, and the enaement would have taken place on the
twenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. But as the
attack on our left flank took place in the evenin after the retreat of
our rear uard (that is, immediately after the fiht at ridneva), and
as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in time, to bein a
eneral enaement then on the evenin of the twenty-fourth, the first
and chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on the
twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fouht on the
twenty-sixth.

After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on the
mornin of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, and
were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to
be.

Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,
unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantae of that position was
increased by the fact that the Russian commanders--not havin fully
realized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the left
flank and the shiftin of the whole field of the forthcomin battle from
riht to left--maintained their extended position from the villae of
Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to move their forces from riht to
left durin the battle. So it happened that throuhout the whole battle
the Russians opposed the entire French army launched aainst our left
flank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's action aainst Utitsa,
and Uvarov's on the riht flank aainst the French, were actions
distinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino
did not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders'
mistakes even at the cost of diminishin the lory due to the Russian
army and people) it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not
fouht on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slihtly
weaker than those of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of the
Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fouht the battle of Borodino on an
open and almost unentrenched position, with forces only half as numerous
as the French; that is to say, under conditions in which it was not
merely unthinkable to fiht for ten hours and secure an indecisive
result, but unthinkable to keep an army even from complete
disinteration and fliht.




CHAPTER XX

On the mornin of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leavin Mozhaysk. At the
descent of the hih steep hill, down which a windin road led out of the
town past the cathedral on the riht, where a service was bein held and
the bells were rinin, Pierre ot out of his vehicle and proceeded on
foot. Behind him a cavalry reiment was comin down the hill preceded by
its siners. Comin up toward him was a train of carts carryin men who
had been wounded in the enaement the day before. The peasant drivers,
shoutin and lashin their horses, kept crossin from side to side. The
carts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lyin or
sittin, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep
incline to make it somethin like a road. The wounded, bandaed with
ras, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to
the sides of the carts as they were jolted aainst one another. Almost
all of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat
and reen swallow-tail coat.

Pierre's coachman shouted anrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to
one side of the road. The cavalry reiment, as it descended the hill
with its siners, surrounded Pierre's carriae and blocked the road.
Pierre stopped, bein pressed aainst the side of the cuttin in which
the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate into
the cuttin and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's head was
the briht Auust sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of the
carts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. The
driver in his bast shoes ran pantin up to it, placed a stone under one
of its tireless hind wheels, and bean arranin the breech-band on his
little horse.

One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaed arm who was followin
the cart on foot, cauht hold of it with his sound hand and turned to
look at Pierre.

"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on to
Moscow?" he asked.

Pierre was so deep in thouht that he did not hear the question. He was
lookin now at the cavalry reiment that had met the convoy of wounded,
now at the cart by which he was standin, in which two wounded men were
sittin and one was lyin. One of those sittin up in the cart had
probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in ras
and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose and
mouth were twisted to one side. This soldier was lookin at the
cathedral and crossin himself. Another, a youn lad, a fair-haired
recruit as white as thouh there was no blood in his thin face, looked
at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay prone so that his
face was not visible. The cavalry siners were passin close by:


Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen, Livin in a forein land.

they san their soldiers' dance son.

As if respondin to them but with a different sort of merriment, the
metallic sound of the bells reverberated hih above and the hot rays of
the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort of
merriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near the
pantin little na where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.

The soldier with the swollen cheek looked anrily at the cavalry
siners.

"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.

"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too.... The
peasants--even they have to o," said the soldier behind the cart,
addressin Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....
They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow! They
want to make an end of it."

In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood what
he wanted to say and nodded approval.

The road was clear aain; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.

He kept lookin to either side of the road for familiar faces, but only
saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of different
branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his white
hat and reen tail coat.

Havin one nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance and
eaerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He was
drivin toward Pierre in a covered i, sittin beside a youn sureon,
and on reconizin Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's
seat to pull up.

"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.

"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."

"Yes, yes, there will be somethin to see...."

Pierre ot out and talked to the doctor, explainin his intention of
takin part in a battle.

The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.

"Why should you be od knows where out of siht, durin the battle?" he
said, exchanin lances with his youn companion. "Anyhow his Serene
Hihness knows you and will receive you raciously. That's what you must
do."

The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.

"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is
exactly?" said Pierre.

"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drive
past Tatarinova, a lot of diin is oin on there. o up the hillock
and you'll see."

"Can one see from there?... If you would..."

But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his i.

"I would o with you but on my honor I'm up to here"--and he pointed to
his throat. "I'm allopin to the commander of the corps. How do matters
stand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an army
of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded,
and we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enouh for
six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other thins as
well--we must manae as best we can!"

The strane thouht that of the thousands of men, youn and old, who had
stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he had
noticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death
amazed Pierre.

"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinkin of anythin but death?"
And by some latent sequence of thouht the descent of the Mozhaysk hill,
the carts with the wounded, the rinin bells, the slantin rays of the
sun, and the sons of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind.

"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a moment
think of what awaits them, but pass by, winkin at the wounded. Yet from
amon these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at my
hat! Strane!" thouht Pierre, continuin his way to Tatarinova.

In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriaes,
waons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander-in-chief
was puttin up there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in and
hardly any of the staff were there--they had one to the church service.
Pierre drove on toward orki.

When he had ascended the hill and reached the little villae street, he
saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with
crosses on their caps, who, talkin and lauhin loudly, animated and
perspirin, were at work on a hue knoll overrown with rass to the
riht of the road.

Some of them were diin, others were wheelin barrowloads of earth
alon planks, while others stood about doin nothin.

Two officers were standin on the knoll, directin the men. On seein
these peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their
position as soldiers, Pierre once more thouht of the wounded men at
Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "They
want the whole nation to fall on them." The siht of these bearded
peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots and
perspirin necks, and their shirts openin from the left toward the
middle, unfastened, exposin their sunburned collarbones, impressed
Pierre more stronly with the solemnity and importance of the moment
than anythin he had yet seen or heard.




CHAPTER XXI

Pierre stepped out of his carriae and, passin the toilin militiamen,
ascended the knoll from which, accordin to the doctor, the battlefield
could be seen.

It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left and
behind him and brihtly lit up the enormous panorama which, risin like
an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.

From above on the left, bisectin that amphitheater, wound the Smolensk
hihroad, passin throuh a villae with a white church some five
hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino.
Below the villae the road crossed the river by a bride and, windin
down and up, rose hiher and hiher to the villae of Valuevo visible
about four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevo
the road disappeared into a yellowin forest on the horizon. Far in the
distance in that birch and fir forest to the riht of the road, the
cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery leamed in the sun. Here and
there over the whole of that blue expanse, to riht and left of the
forest and the road, smokin campfires could be seen and indefinite
masses of troops--ours and the enemy's. The round to the riht--alon
the course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers--was broken and hilly.
Between the hollows the villaes of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the
distance. On the left the round was more level; there were fields of
rain, and the smokin ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down,
could be seen.

All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the
riht side of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere could
he see the battlefield he had expected to find, but only fields,
meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villaes, mounds, and
streams; and try as he would he could descry no military "position" in
this place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinuish our
troops from the enemy's.

"I must ask someone who knows," he thouht, and addressed an officer who
was lookin with curiosity at his hue unmilitary fiure.

"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what villae that is in front?"

"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turnin to his companion.

"Borodino," the other corrected him.

The officer, evidently lad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up to
Pierre.

"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.

"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "There
they are, there... you can see them."

"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.

"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"

The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left
beyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre
had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.

"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll
on the left, near which some troops could be seen.

"Those are ours."

"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in the
distance with a bi tree on it, near a villae that lay in a hollow
where also some campfires were smokin and somethin black was visible.

"That's his aain," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.)
"It was ours yesterday, but now it is his."

"Then how about our position?"

"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I can
tell you quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all our
entrenchments. There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, just
there," and he pointed to the villae in front of them with the white
church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down there where
the rows of hay are lyin in the hollow, there's the bride. That's our
center. Our riht flank is over there"--he pointed sharply to the riht,
far away in the broken round--"That's where the Moskva River is, and we
have thrown up three redoubts there, very stron ones. The left
flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult to
explain.... Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see,
where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left win--now it is
over there, do you see that villae and the smoke? That's Semenovsk,
yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardly
be there. His havin moved his troops there is only a ruse; he will
probably pass round to the riht of the Moskva. But wherever it may be,
many a man will be missin tomorrow!" he remarked.

An elderly sereant who had approached the officer while he was ivin
these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speakin, but
at this point, evidently not likin the officer's remark, interrupted
him.

"abions must be sent for," said he sternly.

The officer appeared abashed, as thouh he understood that one miht
think of how many men would be missin tomorrow but ouht not to speak
of it.

"Well, send number three company aain," the officer replied hurriedly.

"And you, are you one of the doctors?"

"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hill
aain, passin the militiamen.

"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,
holdin his nose as he ran past the men at work.

"There they are... brinin her, comin... There they are... They'll be
here in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard sayin; and officers,
soldiers, and militiamen bean runnin forward alon the road.

A church procession was comin up the hill from Borodino. First alon
the dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms
reversed. From behind them came the sound of church sinin.

Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward the
procession.

"They are brinin her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of od!"
someone cried.

"The Smolensk Mother of od," another corrected him.

The militiamen, both those who had been in the villae and those who had
been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the
church procession. Followin the battalion that marched alon the dusty
road came priests in their vestments--one little old man in a hood with
attendants and siners. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a lare,
dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that had
been brouht from Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. Behind,
before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked,
ran, and bowed to the round.

At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who had
been holdin it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved by
others, the chanters relit their censers, and service bean. The hot
rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with
the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decoratin the icon.
The sinin did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd of
bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.
Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spot
reserved for them. A bald eneral with a St. eore's Cross on his neck
stood just behind the priest's back, and without crossin himself (he
was evidently a erman) patiently awaited the end of the service, which
he considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the
patriotism of the Russian people. Another eneral stood in a martial
pose, crossin himself by shakin his hand in front of his chest while
lookin about him. Standin amon the crowd of peasants, Pierre
reconized several acquaintances amon these notables, but did not look
at them--his whole attention was absorbed in watchin the serious
expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were
all azin eaerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters, who were
sinin the service for the twentieth time that day, bean lazily and
mechanically to sin: "Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of
od," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Thee under od we all
flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection," there aain kindled in
all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity of
the impendin moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of
the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met
that mornin; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back,
and sihs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.

The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed aainst Pierre.
Someone, a very important personae judin by the haste with which way
was made for him, was approachin the icon.

It was Kutuzov, who had been ridin round the position and on his way
back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was bein held. Pierre
reconized him at once by his peculiar fiure, which distinuished him
from everybody else.

With a lon overcoat on his exceedinly stout, round-shouldered body,
with uncovered white head and puffy face showin the white ball of the
eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with plunin, swayin ait into the
crowd and stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself with an
accustomed movement, bent till he touched the round with his hand, and
bowed his white head with a deep sih. Behind Kutuzov was Bennisen and
the suite. Despite the presence of the commander-in-chief, who attracted
the attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers
continued their prayers without lookin at him.

When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavily
to his knees, bowed to the round, and for a lon time tried vainly to
rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weiht. His
white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon as
a child does with naively poutin lips, and aain bowed till he touched
the round with his hand. The other enerals followed his example, then
the officers, and after them with excited faces, pressin on one
another, crowdin, pantin, and pushin, scrambled the soldiers and
militiamen.




CHAPTER XXII

Staerin amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.

"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you et here?" said a voice.

Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushin his knees with his hand
(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),
came up to him smilin. Boris was eleantly dressed, with a slihtly
martial touch appropriate to a campain. He wore a lon coat and like
Kutuzov had a whip slun across his shoulder.

Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the villae and seated himself in the
shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run to
fetch and another had hastily covered with a ru. An immense and
brilliant suite surrounded him.

The icon was carried further, accompanied by the thron. Pierre stopped
some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talkin to Boris.

He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see the
position.

"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of the
camp to you. You will see everythin best from where Count Bennisen
will be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him.
But if you want to ride round the position, come alon with us. We are
just oin to the left flank. Then when we et back, do spend the niht
with me and we'll arrane a ame of cards. Of course you know Dmitri
Sereevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to the third house
in the villae of orki.

"But I should like to see the riht flank. They say it's very stron,"
said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride
round the whole position."

"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thin is the left flank."

"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's reiment? Can you point it
out to me?"

"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."

"What about the left flank?" asked Pierre

"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, od only knows what state our
left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowerin his voice. "It is
not at all what Count Bennisen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll
quite differently, but..." Boris shrued his shoulders, "his Serene
Hihness would not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see..." but
Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant,
came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressin him with an
unembarrassed smile, "I was just tryin to explain our position to the
count. It is amazin how his Serene Hihness could so foresee the
intentions of the French!"

"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.

"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely stron."

Thouh Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris
had contrived to remain at headquarters after the chanes. He had
established himself with Count Bennisen, who, like all on whom Boris
had been in attendance, considered youn Prince Drubetskoy an invaluable
man.

In the hiher command there were two sharply defined parties: Kutuzov's
party and that of Bennisen, the chief of staff. Boris beloned to the
latter and no one else, while showin servile respect to Kutuzov, could
so create an impression that the old fellow was not much ood and that
Bennisen manaed everythin. Now the decisive moment of battle had come
when Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennisen, or even
if Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everythin was done by
Bennisen. In any case many reat rewards would have to be iven for
tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So Boris was
full of nervous vivacity all day.

After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had not
time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered upon
him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all expressed
animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause of
the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions of
personal success; his mind, however, was occupied by the different
expression he saw on other faces--an expression that spoke not of
personal matters but of the universal questions of life and death.
Kutuzov noticed Pierre's fiure and the roup athered round him.

"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.

An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Hihness' wish, and Pierre went
toward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman ot there before him. It was
Dolokhov.

"How did that fellow et here?" asked Pierre.

"He's a creature that wriles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He has
been deraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up aain. He's been
proposin some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picket
line at niht.... He's a brave fellow."

Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.

"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Hihness you miht send
me away or say that you knew what I was reportin, but then I shouldn't
lose anythin..." Dolokhov was sayin.

"Yes, yes."

"But if I were riht, I should be renderin a service to my Fatherland
for which I am ready to die."

"Yes, yes."

"And should your Serene Hihness require a man who will not spare his
skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your Serene
Hihness."

"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his lauhin eye narrowin more and
more as he looked at Pierre.

Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to
Pierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without raisin
his voice, said to Pierre, as thouh continuin an interrupted
conversation:

"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. What
heroism, Count!"

Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by his
Serene Hihness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be cauht by those
words, and so it was.

"What are you sayin about the militia?" he asked Boris.

"Preparin for tomorrow, your Serene Hihness--for death--they have put
on clean shirts."

"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed his
eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sih.

"So you want to smell unpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's a
pleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is
she well? My quarters are at your service."

And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov bean lookin about
absent-mindedly as if forettin all he wanted to say or do.

Then, evidently rememberin what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew
Kaysarov, his adjutant's brother.

"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they o, eh? Those he
wrote about erakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditin'... Recite them,
recite them!" said he, evidently preparin to lauh.

Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilinly nodded his head to the rhythm of
the verses.

When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand.

"I am very lad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, reardless of
the presence of straners and in a particularly resolute and solemn
tone. "On the eve of a day when od alone knows who of us is fated to
survive, I am lad of this opportunity to tell you that I reret the
misunderstandins that occurred between us and should wish you not to
have any ill feelin for me. I be you to forive me."

Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowin what to say to him.
With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.

Boris said a few words to his eneral, and Count Bennisen turned to
Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him alon the line.

"It will interest you," said he.

"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.

Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennisen and his
suite, with Pierre amon them, set out on their ride alon the line.




CHAPTER XXIII

From orki, Bennisen descended the hihroad to the bride which, when
they had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out as
bein the center of our position and where rows of frarant new-mown hay
lay by the riverside. They rode across that bride into the villae of
Borodino and thence turned to the left, passin an enormous number of
troops and uns, and came to a hih knoll where militiamen were diin.
This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as
the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special
attention to it. He did not know that it would become more memorable to
him than any other spot on the plain of Borodino.

They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers were
drain away the last los from the huts and barns. Then they rode
downhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by
hail, followin a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrows
of the plowed land, and reached some fleches * which were still bein
du.


* A kind of entrenchment.

At the fleches Bennisen stopped and bean lookin at the Shevardino
Redoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where several
horsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon or
Murat was there, and they all azed eaerly at this little roup of
horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, tryin to uess which of the
scarcely discernible fiures was Napoleon. At last those mounted men
rode away from the mound and disappeared.

Bennisen spoke to a eneral who approached him, and bean explainin
the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, strainin each
faculty to understand the essential points of the impendin battle, but
was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for the
task. He could make nothin of it. Bennisen stopped speakin and,
noticin that Pierre was listenin, suddenly said to him:

"I don't think this interests you?"

"On the contrary it's very interestin!" replied Pierre not quite
truthfully.

From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, alon a road
windin throuh a thick, low-rowin birch wood. In the middle of the
wood a brown hare with white feet spran out and, scared by the tramp of
the many horses, rew so confused that it leaped alon the road in front
of them for some time, arousin eneral attention and lauhter, and only
when several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappear
in the thicket. After oin throuh the wood for about a mile and a half
they came out on a lade where troops of Tuchkov's corps were stationed
to defend the left flank.

Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennisen talked a reat deal and with
much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, ave orders of reat military
importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some hih round not
occupied by troops. Bennisen loudly criticized this mistake, sayin
that it was madness to leave a heiht which commanded the country around
unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the enerals expressed
the same opinion. One in particular declared with martial heat that they
were put there to be slauhtered. Bennisen on his own authority ordered
the troops to occupy the hih round. This disposition on the left flank
increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to understand military
matters. Listenin to Bennisen and the enerals criticizin the
position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and
shared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand
how the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so ross
and palpable a blunder.

Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennisen supposed,
put there to defend the position, but were in a concealed position as an
ambush, that they should not be seen and miht be able to strike an
approachin enemy unexpectedly. Bennisen did not know this and moved
the troops forward accordin to his own ideas without mentionin the
matter to the commander-in-chief.




CHAPTER XXIV

On that briht evenin of Auust 25, Prince Andrew lay leanin on his
elbow in a broken-down shed in the villae of Knyazkovo at the further
end of his reiment's encampment. Throuh a ap in the broken wall he
could see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty year-old birches
with their lower branches lopped off, a field on which shocks of oats
were standin, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of campfires--
the soldiers' kitchens.

Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed to
him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt aitated and irritable as
he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.

He had received and iven the orders for next day's battle and had
nothin more to do. But his thouhts--the simplest, clearest, and
therefore most terrible thouhts--would ive him no peace. He knew that
tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken part
in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death
presented itself to him--not in relation to any worldly matter or with
reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to
his own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. And
from the heiht of this perception all that had previously tormented and
preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white liht without
shadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All life
appeared to him like maic-lantern pictures at which he had lon been
azin by artificial liht throuh a lass. Now he suddenly saw those
badly daubed pictures in clear dayliht and without a lass. "Yes, yes!
There they are, those false imaes that aitated, enraptured, and
tormented me," said he to himself, passin in review the principal
pictures of the maic lantern of life and reardin them now in the cold
white dayliht of his clear perception of death. "There they are, those
rudely painted fiures that once seemed splendid and mysterious. lory,
the ood of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself--how
important these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meanin they
seemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the
cold white liht of this mornin which I feel is dawnin for me." The
three reat sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his
love for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which had
overrun half Russia. "Love... that little irl who seemed to me brimmin
over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plans
of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloud
bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her
faithful to me for the whole year of my absence! Like the entle dove in
the fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was much simpler
really.... It was all very simple and horrible."

"When my father built Bald Hills he thouht the place was his: his land,
his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,
unconscious of his existence, as he miht brush a chip from his path,
and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says
it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when he is not
here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trial
intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And tomorrow I
shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own
men, by a soldier discharin a musket close to my ear as one of them
did yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heels
and flin me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and new
conditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to others
and about which I shall know nothin. I shall not exist..."

He looked at the row of birches shinin in the sunshine, with their
motionless reen and yellow foliae and white bark. "To die... to be
killed tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should still
be, but no me...."

And the birches with their liht and shade, the curly clouds, the smoke
of the campfires, and all that was around him chaned and seemed
terrible and menacin. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose
quickly, went out of the shed, and bean to walk about.

After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who's that?"
he cried.

The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadron commander,
but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered the
shed followed by an adjutant and the reimental paymaster.

Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had come
about, ave them some further instructions, and was about to dismiss
them when he heard a familiar, lispin, voice behind the shed.

"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumblin over somethin.

Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped
over a pole on the round and had nearly fallen, comin his way. It was
unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in eneral,
and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of
his last visit to Moscow.

"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brins you here? This is
unexpected!"

As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness--they
expressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached the
shed full of animation, but on seein Prince Andrew's face he felt
constrained and ill at ease.

"I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," said
Pierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word
"interestin." "I wish to see the battle."

"Oh yes, and what do the masonic brothers say about war? How would they
stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? And
my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously.

"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, but
missed them. They have one to your estate near Moscow."




CHAPTER XXV

The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and have
tea. Seats were brouht in and so was the tea. The officers azed with
surprise at Pierre's hue stout fiure and listened to his talk of
Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. Prince
Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbiddin that Pierre
addressed his remarks chiefly to the ood-natured battalion commander.

"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrew
interrupted him.

"Yes--that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not bein a military man
I can't say I have understood it fully, but I understand the eneral
position."

"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," said
Prince Andrew.

"Oh!" said Pierre, lookin over his spectacles in perplexity at Prince
Andrew. "Well, and what do you think of Kutuzov's appointment?" he
asked.

"I was very lad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied Prince
Andrew.

"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they are sayin
heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"

"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicatin the officers.

Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendinly interroative smile
with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.

"We see liht aain, since his Serenity has been appointed, your
excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turnin to lance at
his colonel.

"Why so?" asked Pierre.

"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, when
we were retreatin from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wisp
of hay or anythin. You see, we were oin away, so he would et it all;
wasn't it so, your excellency?" and aain Timokhin turned to the prince.
"But we daren't. In our reiment two officers were court-martialed for
that kind of thin. But when his Serenity took command everythin became
straiht forward. Now we see liht..."

"Then why was it forbidden?"

Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowin what or how to answer
such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.

"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandonin to the
enemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound: one
can't permit the land to be pillaed and accustom the troops to
maraudin. At Smolensk too he juded correctly that the French miht
outflank us, as they had larer forces. But he could not understand
this," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape him
involuntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the first time,
we were fihtin for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit in the
men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for two
days, and that that success had increased our strenth tenfold. He
ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothin.
He had no thouht of betrayin us, he tried to do the best he could, he
thouht out everythin, and that is why he is unsuitable. He is
unsuitable now, just because he plans out everythin very thorouhly and
accurately as every erman has to. How can I explain?... Well, say your
father has a erman valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies your
father's requirements better than you could, then it's all riht to let
him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet
away and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,
and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a straner could.
So it has been with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreiner could
serve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in daner
she needs one of her own kin. But in your club they have been makin him
out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result will
be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will make
him out a hero or a enius instead of a traitor, and that will be still
more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious erman."

"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.

"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" replied
Prince Andrew ironically.

"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all
continencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions."

"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matter
settled lon ao.

Pierre looked at him in surprise.

"And yet they say that war is like a ame of chess?" he remarked.

"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that in
chess you may think over each move as lon as you please and are not
limited for time, and with this difference too, that a kniht is always
stroner than a pawn, and two pawns are always stroner than one, while
in war a battalion is sometimes stroner than a division and sometimes
weaker than a company. The relative strenth of bodies of troops can
never be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if thins depended
on arranements made by the staff, I should be there makin
arranements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in the
reiment with these entlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow's
battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends,
and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,
and least of all on position."

"But on what then?"

"On the feelin that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and
in each soldier."

Prince Andrew lanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander in alarm
and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity Prince
Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
expressin the thouhts that had suddenly occurred to him.

"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose
the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,
but very early we said to ourselves that we were losin the battle, and
we did lose it. And we said so because we had nothin to fiht for
there, we wanted to et away from the battlefield as soon as we could.
'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not said that till
the evenin, heaven knows what miht not have happened. But tomorrow we
shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the
riht flank too extended," he went on. "That's all nonsense, there's
nothin of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million most
diverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact that
our men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man is
killed, but all that is bein done at present is only play. The fact is
that those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only do
not help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their own
petty interests."

"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.

"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a moment
affordin opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross
or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundred
thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fiht, and
the thin is that these two hundred thousand men will fiht and the side
that fihts more fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if you
like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those at
the top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what
may, we shall win!"

"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," said
Timokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,
believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!'
they say."

All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed
with them, ivin final orders to the adjutant. After they had one
Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversation
when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not far
from the shed, and lookin in that direction Prince Andrew reconized
Wolzoen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close by
continuin to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these
words:

"Der Krie muss in Raum verlet werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht enu
Preis eben," * said one of them.


* "The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently commend that
view."

"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwächen, so
kann man ewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtun
nehmen." *


* "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of course one cannot
take into account the loss of private individuals."

"Oh, no," areed the other.

"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an anry snort, when they had
ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at Bald
Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was sayin to you--
those erman entlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only make
all the mess they can, because they have nothin in their erman heads
but theories not worth an empty eshell and haven't in their hearts the
one thin needed tomorrow--that which Timokhin has. They have yielded up
all Europe to him, and have now come to teach us. Fine teachers!" and
aain his voice rew shrill.

"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.

"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thin I would do if I
had the power," he bean aain, "I would not take prisoners. Why take
prisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my home and are on
their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraed and are outrain me
every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals.
And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed!
Since they are my foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been
said at Tilsit."

"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, lookin with shinin eyes at Prince Andrew.
"I quite aree with you!"

The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all that
day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now
understood the whole meanin and importance of this war and of the
impendin battle. All he had seen that day, all the sinificant and
stern expressions on the faces he had seen in passin, were lit up for
him by a new liht. He understood that latent heat (as they say in
physics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,
and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and as
it were lihtheartedly.

"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself would
quite chane the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have
played at war--that's what's vile! We play at mananimity and all that
stuff. Such mananimity and sensibility are like the mananimity and
sensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf bein killed: she
is so kindhearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eatin the
calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, of
chivalry, of flas of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. It's
all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flas of truce in 1805; they humbued
us and we humbued them. They plunder other people's houses, issue
false paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my father,
and then talk of rules of war and mananimity to foes! Take no
prisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I have
throuh the same sufferins..."

Prince Andrew, who had thouht it was all the same to him whether or not
Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in his
speech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a few
times in silence, but his eyes littered feverishly and his lips
quivered as he bean speakin.

"If there was none of this mananimity in war, we should o to war only
when it was worth while oin to certain death, as now. Then there would
not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich. And
when there was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then the
determination of the troops would be quite different. Then all these
Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leadin would not follow him
into Russia, and we should not o to fiht in Austria and Prussia
without knowin why. War is not courtesy but the most horrible thin in
life; and we ouht to understand that and not play at war. We ouht to
accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies in
that: et rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a ame. As it is
now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The military
callin is the most hihly honored.

"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are the
habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war are
spyin, treachery, and their encouraement, the ruin of a country's
inhabitants, robbin them or stealin to provision the army, and fraud
and falsehood termed military craft. The habits of the military class
are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, inorance,
cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is the
hihest class, respected by everyone. All the kins, except the Chinese,
wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people receives the
hihest rewards.

"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they kill
and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksivin services for
havin killed so many people (they even exaerate the number), and they
announce a victory, supposin that the more people they have killed the
reater their achievement. How does od above look at them and hear
them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercin voice. "Ah, my
friend, it has of late become hard for me to live. I see that I have
beun to understand too much. And it doesn't do for man to taste of the
tree of knowlede of ood and evil.... Ah, well, it's not for lon!" he
added.

"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. o back to
orki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.

"Oh no!" Pierre replied, lookin at Prince Andrew with frihtened,
compassionate eyes.

"o, o! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeated Prince
Andrew.

He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "ood-bye, be
off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet aain or not..." and turnin away
hurriedly he entered the shed.

It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the
expression of Prince Andrew's face was anry or tender.

For some time he stood in silence considerin whether he should follow
him or o away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "And I know
that this is our last meetin!" He sihed deeply and rode back to orki.

On re-enterin the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a ru, but he could
not sleep.

He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imaination. On
one of them he dwelt lon and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evenin
in Petersbur. Natasha with animated and excited face was tellin him
how she had one to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost
her way in the bi forest. She incoherently described the depths of the
forest, her feelins, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, and
constantly interrupted her story to say: "No, I can't! I'm not tellin
it riht; no, you don't understand," thouh he encouraed her by sayin
that he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to
say. But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that
they did not convey the passionately poetic feelin she had experienced
that day and wished to convey. "He was such a delihtful old man, and it
was so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can't
describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smiled
now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "I
understood her," he thouht. "I not only understood her, but it was just
that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of soul--
that very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body--it was
that soul I loved in her... loved so stronly and happily..." and
suddenly he remembered how his love had ended. "He did not need anythin
of that kind. He neither saw nor understood anythin of the sort. He
only saw in her a pretty and fresh youn irl, with whom he did not
dein to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and ay!"

Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and aain bean
pacin up and down in front of the shed.




CHAPTER XXVI

On Auust 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset, prefect
of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters at
Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter from
Madrid.

Donnin his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had brouht
for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first
compartment of Napoleon's tent, where he bean openin the box while
conversin with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.

Fabvier, not enterin the tent, remained at the entrance talkin to some
enerals of his acquaintance.

The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishin his
toilet. Slihtly snortin and runtin, he presented now his back and
now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbin
him down. Another valet, with his finer over the mouth of a bottle, was
sprinklin Eau de Colone on the Emperor's pampered body with an
expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau
de Colone should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and matted
on the forehead, but his face, thouh puffy and yellow, expressed
physical satisfaction. "o on, harder, o on!" he muttered to the valet
who was rubbin him, slihtly twitchin and runtin. An aide-de-camp,
who had entered the bedroom to report to the Emperor the number of
prisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standin by the door after
deliverin his messae, awaitin permission to withdraw. Napoleon,
frownin, looked at him from under his brows.

"No prisoners!" said he, repeatin the aide-de-camp's words. "They are
forcin us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russian
army.... o on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunchin his back and
presentin his fat shoulders.

"All riht. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," he said,
noddin to the aide-de-camp.

"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared throuh the door of the
tent.

Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearin the blue uniform of
the uards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.

De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily enaed arranin the present
he had brouht from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of the
entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected
rapidity that he had not time to finish arranin the surprise.

Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and uessed that they were
not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of ivin him
a surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier to
him, listenin silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told him
of the heroism and devotion of his troops fihtin at Salamanca, at the
other end of Europe, with but one thouht--to be worthy of their
Emperor--and but one fear--to fail to please him. The result of that
battle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks durin
Fabvier's account, as if he had not expected that matters could o
otherwise in his absence.

"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you
later," he added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time had
prepared the surprise, havin placed somethin on the chairs and covered
it with a cloth.

De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only the old
retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,
presentin an envelope.

Napoleon turned to him aily and pulled his ear.

"You have hurried here. I am very lad. Well, what is Paris sayin?" he
asked, suddenly chanin his former stern expression for a most cordial
tone.

"Sire, all Paris rerets your absence," replied de Beausset as was
proper.

But thouh Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say somethin of this
kind, and thouh in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was
pleased to hear it from him. Aain he honored him by touchin his ear.

"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.

"Sire, I expected nothin less than to find you at the ates of Moscow,"
replied de Beausset.

Napoleon smiled and, liftin his head absent-mindedly, lanced to the
riht. An aide-de-camp approached with lidin steps and offered him a
old snuffbox, which he took.

"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raisin the open
snuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days you
will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.
You will have a pleasant journey."

De Beausset bowed ratefully at this reard for his taste for travel (of
which he had not till then been aware).

"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticin that all the courtiers were
lookin at somethin concealed under a cloth.

With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turnin his
back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitchin off the cloth at the
same time, and said:

"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."

It was a portrait, painted in briht colors by erard, of the son borne
to Napoleon by the dauhter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
some reason everyone called "The Kin of Rome."

A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine
Madonna was depicted playin at stick and ball. The ball represented the
terrestrial lobe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.

Thouh it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depictin
the so-called Kin of Rome spikin the earth with a stick, the alleory
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
Paris, quite clear and very pleasin.

"The Kin of Rome!" he said, pointin to the portrait with a raceful
esture. "Admirable!"

With the natural capacity of an Italian for chanin the expression of
his face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of
pensive tenderness. He felt that what he now said and did would be
historical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for him--
whose randeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the
terrestrial lobe--to show, in contrast to that randeur, the simplest
paternal tenderness. His eyes rew dim, he moved forward, lanced round
at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on it
before the portrait. At a sinle esture from him everyone went out on
tiptoe, leavin the reat man to himself and his emotion.

Havin sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowin why--the
thick spot of paint representin the hihest liht in the portrait,
rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the
portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old uard, stationed
round it, miht not be deprived of the pleasure of seein the Kin of
Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.

And while he was doin M. de Beausset the honor of breakfastin with
him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of the
officers and men of the Old uard who had run up to see the portrait.

"Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came those
ecstatic cries.

After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of
the day to the army.

"Short and eneretic!" he remarked when he had read over the
proclamation which he had dictated straiht off without corrections. It
ran:

Soldiers! This is the battle you have so loned for. Victory depends on
you. It is essential for us; it will ive us all we need: comfortable
quarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you did at
Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let our remotest posterity
recall your achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of each of
you: "He was in the reat battle before Moscow!"

"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and invitin M. de Beausset, who was
so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent
to where the horses stood saddled.

"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to
accompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and
was afraid of doin so.

But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. When
Napoleon came out of the tent the shoutin of the uards before his
son's portrait rew still louder. Napoleon frowned.

"Take him away!" he said, pointin with a racefully majestic esture to
the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle."

De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sihed deeply, to
indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.




CHAPTER XXVII

On the twenty-fifth of Auust, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spent
the whole day on horseback inspectin the locality, considerin plans
submitted to him by his marshals, and personally ivin commands to his
enerals.

The oriinal line of the Russian forces alon the river Kolocha had been
dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twenty-
fourth, and part of the line--the left flank--had been drawn back. That
part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the round was
more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to anyone, military
or not, that it was here the French should attack. It would seem that
not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion, nor any
particular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his marshals,
nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality called enius
that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the historians who
described the event later and the men who then surrounded Napoleon, and
he himself, thouht otherwise.

Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound
air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,
and without communicatin to the enerals around him the profound course
of ideas which uided his decisions merely ave them his final
conclusions in the form of commands. Havin listened to a suestion
from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russian
left win, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explainin why
not. To a proposal made by eneral Campan (who was to attack the
fleches) to lead his division throuh the woods, Napoleon areed, thouh
the so-called Duke of Elchinen (Ney) ventured to remark that a movement
throuh the woods was danerous and miht disorder the division.

Havin inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleon
pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two
batteries should be set up by the morrow to act aainst the Russian
entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the field
artillery should be placed.

After ivin these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the
dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.

These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasm
and other historians with profound respect, were as follows:

At dawn the two new batteries established durin the niht on the plain
occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposin
batteries of the enemy.

At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,
eneral Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all the
howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open
fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, aainst which
will operate:


24 uns of the artillery of the uards 30 uns of Campan's division

and     8 uns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions --

in all 62 uns.

The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, eneral Fouche, will
place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the
flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left,
which will have forty uns in all directed aainst it.

eneral Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the
howitzers of the uard's artillery aainst either one or other of the
entrenchments.

Durin the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance throuh the wood
on the villae and turn the enemy's position.

eneral Campan will move throuh the wood to seize the first
fortification.

After the advance has beun in this manner, orders will be iven in
accordance with the enemy's movements.

The cannonade on the left flank will bein as soon as the uns of the
riht win are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of the
vice-Kin's division will open a heavy fire on seein the attack
commence on the riht win.

The vice-Kin will occupy the villae and cross by its three brides,
advancin to the same heihts as Morand's and ibrard's divisions, which
under his leadership will be directed aainst the redoubt and come into
line with the rest of the forces.

All this must be done in ood order (le tout se fera avec ordre et
methode) as far as possible retainin troops in reserve.

The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,

September, 6, 1812.

These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one allows
oneself to reard the arranements without reliious awe of his enius,
related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points--four different
orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.

In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the
spot chosen by Napoleon, with the uns of Pernetti and Fouche; which
were to come in line with them, 102 uns in all, were to open fire and
shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not be
done, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not
carry to the Russian works, and those 102 uns shot into the air until
the nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved them
forward.

The second order was that Poniatowski, movin to the villae throuh the
wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and was
not done, because Poniatowski, advancin on the villae throuh the
wood, met Tuchkov there barrin his way, and could not and did not turn
the Russian position.

The third order was: eneral Campan will move throuh the wood to seize
the first fortification. eneral Campan's division did not seize the
first fortification but was driven back, for on emerin from the wood
it had to reform under rapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.

The fourth order was: The vice-Kin will occupy the villae (Borodino)
and cross by its three brides, advancin to the same heihts as
Morand's and ibrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions are
iven), which under his leadership will be directed aainst the redoubt
and come into line with the rest of the forces.

As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelliible
sentence as from the attempts the vice-Kin made to execute the orders
iven him, he was to advance from the left throuh Borodino to the
redoubt while the divisions of Morand and erard were to advance
simultaneously from the front.

All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could not
be executed. After passin throuh Borodino the vice-Kin was driven
back to the Kolocha and could et no farther; while the divisions of
Morand and erard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and the
redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thin
probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of the
orders in the disposition was, or could be, executed. But in the
disposition it is said that, after the fiht has commenced in this
manner, orders will be iven in accordance with the enemy's movements,
and so it miht be supposed that all necessary arranements would be
made by Napoleon durin the battle. But this was not and could not be
done, for durin the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as
appeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not one
of his orders durin the fiht could be executed.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino
because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold the
orders he ave before and durin the battle would have been still more
full of enius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the world
have been chaned. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by
the will of one man--Peter the reat--and that France from a republic
became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one
man--Napoleon--to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon had
a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of Auust may seem loical and
convincin.

If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fiht or not to fiht the
battle of Borodino, and if this or that other arranement depended on
his will, then evidently a cold affectin the manifestation of his will
miht have saved Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to brin
Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been the
savior of Russia. Alon that line of thouht such a deduction is
indubitable, as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest
(without knowin what he was jestin at) when he saw that the Massacre
of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach bein deraned. But
to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,
Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia
beun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that arument seems not merely
untrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To the
question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,
namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on hih--
depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in the
events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these events is
purely external and fictitious.

Strane as at first lance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of
St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, thouh he ave the
order for it and thouht it was done as a result of that order; and
strane as it may seem to suppose that the slauhter of eihty thousand
men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, thouh he ordered the
commencement and conduct of the battle and thouht it was done because
he ordered it; strane as these suppositions appear, yet human dinity--
which tells me that each of us is, if not more at least not less a man
than the reat Napoleon--demands the acceptance of that solution of the
question, and historic investiation abundantly confirms it.

At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.
That was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killed
people.

The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino
not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. The whole
army--French, Italian, erman, Polish, and Dutch--hunry, raed, and
weary of the campain, felt at the siht of an army blockin their road
to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon then
forbidden them to fiht the Russians, they would have killed him and
have proceeded to fiht the Russians because it was inevitable.

When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offerin them, as compensation
for mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their havin been
in the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive l'Empereur!" just as they
had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the siht of the portrait of the boy
piercin the terrestrial lobe with a toy stick, and just as they would
have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at any nonsense that miht be told them.
There was nothin left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and o
to fiht, in order to et food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it
was not because of Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow
men.

And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for none
of his orders were executed and durin the battle he did not know what
was oin on before him. So the way in which these people killed one
another was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurred independently of
him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who took
part in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took
place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a cold
has no more historic interest than the cold of the least of the
transport soldiers.

Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was the
cause of his dispositions not bein as well-planned as on former
occasions, and of his orders durin the battle not bein as ood as
previously, is quite baseless, which aain shows that Napoleon's cold on
the twenty-sixth of Auust was unimportant.

The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even better,
than previous dispositions by which he had won victories. His pseudo-
orders durin the battle were also no worse than formerly, but much the
same as usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse than
previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon did
not win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders seem
very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks of
importance, when they relate to a battle that has been lost, and the
very worst dispositions and orders seem very ood, and serious people
fill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to a
battle that has been won.

The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were
a model of perfection for that kind of composition, but still they were
criticized--criticized for their very perfection, for their excessive
minuteness.

Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office as
representative of authority as well as, and even better than, at other
battles. He did nothin harmful to the proress of the battle; he
inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did not
contradict himself, did not et frihtened or run away from the field of
battle, but with his reat tact and military experience carried out his
role of appearin to command, calmly and with dinity.




CHAPTER XXIX

On returnin from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:

"The chessmen are set up, the ame will bein tomorrow!"

Havin ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he bean to talk to him
about Paris and about some chanes he meant to make in the Empress'
household, surprisin the prefect by his memory of minute details
relatin to the court.

He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of
travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident sureon who
knows his job does when turnin up his sleeves and puttin on his apron
while a patient is bein strapped to the operatin table. "The matter is
in my hands and is clear and definite in my head. When the time comes to
set to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, and
the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident you
ouht to be, and the more amazed at my enius."

Havin finished his second lass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before
the serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He was
so much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and in
spite of his cold which had rown worse from the dampness of the
evenin, he went into the lare division of the tent at three o'clock in
the mornin, loudly blowin his nose. He asked whether the Russians had
not withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in the
same places. He nodded approval.

The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.

"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do ood business today?" Napoleon
asked him.

"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.

Napoleon looked at him.

"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?"
continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."

Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a lon time leanin his head on his
hand.

"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished reatly since
Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said so
and I am beinnin to experience it. But the uards, Rapp, the uards
are intact?" he remarked interroatively.

"Yes, sire," replied Rapp.

Napoleon took a lozene, put it in his mouth, and lanced at his watch.
He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly mornin. It was impossible
to ive further orders for the sake of killin time, for the orders had
all been iven and were now bein executed.

"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the reiments of the
uards?" asked Napoleon sternly.

"Yes, sire."

"The rice too?"

Rapp replied that he had iven the Emperor's order about the rice, but
Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believin that his
order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleon
ordered another lass to be brouht for Rapp, and silently sipped his
own.

"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffin at his lass.
"This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine--what is the ood of
medicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart ave me these lozenes but
they don't help at all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure anythin.
Our body is a machine for livin. It is oranized for that, it is its
nature. Let life o on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, it
will do more than if you paralyze it by encumberin it with remedies.
Our body is like a perfect watch that should o for a certain time; the
watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumblin, and that
blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for livin, that is all."

And havin entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,
Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly ave a new one.

"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is the art of
bein stroner than the enemy at a iven moment. That's all."

Rapp made no reply.

"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shall
see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks and
did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall
see!"

He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feel
sleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothin to do. He
rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went out
of the tent. The niht was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible
moisture was descendin from above. Near by, the campfires were dimly
burnin amon the French uards, and in the distance those of the
Russian line shone throuh the smoke. The weather was calm, and the
rustle and tramp of the French troops already beinnin to move to take
up their positions were clearly audible.

Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires and
listened to these sounds, and as he was passin a tall uardsman in a
shay cap, who was standin sentinel before his tent and had drawn
himself up like a black pillar at siht of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped
in front of him.

"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation of
military bluntness and eniality with which he always addressed the
soldiers.

The man answered the question.

"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your reiment had its rice?"

"It has, Your Majesty."

Napoleon nodded and walked away.

At half-past five Napoleon rode to the villae of Shevardino.

It was rowin liht, the sky was clearin, only a sinle cloud lay in
the east. The abandoned campfires were burnin themselves out in the
faint mornin liht.

On the riht a sinle deep report of a cannon resounded and died away in
the prevailin silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third report
shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on the
riht.

The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others ran out
and yet more were heard minlin with and overtakin one another.

Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he
dismounted. The ame had beun.




CHAPTER XXX

On returnin to orki after havin seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered
his room to et the horses ready and to call him early in the mornin,
and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Boris
had iven up to him.

Before he was thorouhly awake next mornin everybody had already left
the hut. The panes were rattlin in the little windows and his room was
shakin him.

"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept repeatin
pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without lookin at
him, havin apparently lost hope of ettin him to wake up.

"What? Has it beun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, wakin up.

"Hear the firin," said the room, a dischared soldier. "All the
entlemen have one out, and his Serene Hihness himself rode past lon
ao."

Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was briht,
fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just burstin forth from behind a
cloud that had concealed it, was shinin, with rays still half broken by
the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the dew-
besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the
windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standin before the hut. The
roar of uns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutant accompanied by a
Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.

"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.

Tellin the room to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down the
street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle the
day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of the
staff could be heard conversin in French, and Kutuzov's ray head in a
white cap with a red band was visible, his ray nape sunk between his
shoulders. He was lookin throuh a field lass down the hihroad before
him.

Mountin the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,
spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that
spot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops and
covered by smoke clouds from the uns, and the slantin rays of the
briht sun, risin slihtly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon it
throuh the clear mornin air penetratin streaks of rosy, olden-tinted
liht and lon dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of the
panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-reen
color; its undulatin outline was silhouetted aainst the horizon and
was pierced beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk hihroad crowded with troops.
Nearer at hand littered olden cornfields interspersed with copses.
There were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the riht and
left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed
Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodino
and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.

Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially to
the left where the Voyna flowin between its marshy banks falls into the
Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and to
become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and maically colored
and outlined everythin. The smoke of the uns minled with this mist,
and over the whole expanse and throuh that mist the rays of the mornin
sun were reflected, flashin back like lihtnin from the water, from
the dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded toether by the
riverbanks and in Borodino. A white church could be seen throuh the
mist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as dense
masses of soldiers, or reen ammunition chests and ordnance. And all
this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over the
whole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so
alon the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods
and fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the hih
round, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to sprin up out of
nothin, now sinly, now several at a time, some translucent, others
dense, which, swellin, rowin, rollin, and blendin, extended over
the whole expanse.

These puffs of smoke and (strane to say) the sound of the firin
produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.

"Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merin from
violet into ray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a second
later.

"Puff! puff!"--and two clouds arose pushin one another and blendin
toether; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirmin what the eye had
seen.

Pierre lanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a round
compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floatin
to one side, and--"puff" (with a pause)--"puff, puff!" three and then
four more appeared and then from each, with the same interval--"boom--
boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds in reply. It seemed as
if those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes stood still while
woods, fields, and litterin bayonets ran past them. From the left,
over fields and bushes, those lare balls of smoke were continually
appearin followed by their solemn reports, while nearer still, in the
hollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that had
no time to become balls, but had their little echoes in just the same
way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of musketry, but it
was irreular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon.

Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shinin bayonets, that
movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite,
to compare his impressions with those of others. They were all lookin
at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with the
same feelins. All their faces were now shinin with that latent warmth
of feelin Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understood
after his talk with Prince Andrew.

"o, my dear fellow, o... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov was sayin
to a eneral who stood beside him, not takin his eye from the
battlefield.

Havin received this order the eneral passed by Pierre on his way down
the knoll.

"To the crossin!" said the eneral coldly and sternly in reply to one
of the staff who asked where he was oin.

"I'll o there too, I too!" thouht Pierre, and followed the eneral.

The eneral mounted a horse a Cossack had brouht him. Pierre went to
his room who was holdin his horses and, askin which was the quietest,
clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turnin out his toes
pressed his heels aainst its sides and, feelin that his spectacles
were slippin off but unable to let o of the mane and reins, he
alloped after the eneral, causin the staff officers to smile as they
watched him from the knoll.




CHAPTER XXXI

Havin descended the hill the eneral after whom Pierre was allopin
turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losin siht of him, alloped in
amon some ranks of infantry marchin ahead of him. He tried to pass
either in front of them or to the riht or left, but there were soldiers
everywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with some
unseen but evidently important task. They all azed with the same
dissatisfied and inquirin expression at this stout man in a white hat,
who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse's
hoofs.

"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.

Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,
bendin over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shyin horse,
alloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.

There was a bride ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firin.
Pierre rode up to them. Without bein aware of it he had come to the
bride across the Kolocha between orki and Borodino, which the French
(havin occupied Borodino) were attackin in the first phase of the
battle. Pierre saw that there was a bride in front of him and that
soldiers were doin somethin on both sides of it and in the meadow,
amon the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid the
smoke of the campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firin
oin on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle. He did
not notice the sound of the bullets whistlin from every side, or the
projectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other side
of the river, and for a lon time did not notice the killed and wounded,
thouh many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which did
not leave his face.

"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him aain.

"To the left!... Keep to the riht!" the men shouted to him.

Pierre went to the riht, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski's
adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked anrily at him, evidently
also intendin to shout at him, but on reconizin him he nodded.

"How have you ot here?" he said, and alloped on.

Pierre, feelin out of place there, havin nothin to do, and afraid of
ettin in someone's way aain, alloped after the adjutant.

"What's happenin here? May I come with you?" he asked.

"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and ridin up to a stout
colonel who was standin in the meadow, he ave him some messae and
then addressed Pierre.

"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Still
inquisitive?"

"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.

But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.

"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Baration on the left flank
they're ettin it frihtfully hot."

"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?"

"Come alon with me to our knoll. We can et a view from there and in
our battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you come?"

"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, lookin round for his room.

It was only now that he noticed wounded men staerin alon or bein
carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the day
before, a soldier was lyin athwart the rows of scented hay, with his
head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.

"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but seein
the stern expression of the adjutant who was also lookin that way, he
checked himself.

Pierre did not find his room and rode alon the hollow with the
adjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse laed behind the adjutant's
and jolted him at every step.

"You don't seem to be used to ridin, Count?" remarked the adjutant.

"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in a
puzzled tone.

"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off forele above the
knee. A bullet, no doubt. I conratulate you, Count, on your baptism of
fire!"

Havin ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillery
which had been moved forward and was in action, deafenin them with the
noise of firin, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,
with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up
the hill on foot.

"Is the eneral here?" asked the adjutant on reachin the knoll.

"He was here a minute ao but has just one that way," someone told him,
pointin to the riht.

The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.

"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll o up onto the knoll if I
may?"

"Yes, do. You'll see everythin from there and it's less danerous, and
I'll come for you."

Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meet
aain, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that
day.

The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known
to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and to the
French as la rande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre,
around which tens of thousands fell, and which the French rearded as
the key to the whole position.

This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches had
been du. Within the entrenchment stood ten uns that were bein fired
throuh openins in the earthwork.

In line with the knoll on both sides stood other uns which also fired
incessantly. A little behind the uns stood infantry. When ascendin
that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trenches
had been du and from which a few uns were firin, was the most
important point of the battle.

On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thouht it one
of the least sinificant parts of the field.

Havin reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trench
surroundin the battery and azed at what was oin on around him with
an unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about the
battery still with that same smile, tryin not to obstruct the soldiers
who were loadin, haulin the uns, and continually runnin past him
with bas and chares. The uns of that battery were bein fired
continually one after another with a deafenin roar, envelopin the
whole neihborhood in powder smoke.

In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,
here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were
separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common and
as it were family feelin of animation.

The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary fiure in a white hat made an
unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him with
surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artillery
officer, a tall, lon-leed, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as if
to see the action of the farthest un and looked at him with curiosity.

A youn round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only just
out of the Cadet Collee, who was zealously commandin the two uns
entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.

"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not be
here."

The soldiers shook their heads disapprovinly as they looked at Pierre.
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat
was doin no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench
with a shy smile or, politely makin way for the soldiers, paced up and
down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,
their feelin of hostile distrust radually bean to chane into a
kindly and banterin sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dos,
cocks, oats, and in eneral for the animals that live with the
reiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,
ave him a nickname ("our entleman"), and made kindly fun of him amon
themselves.

A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around
with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up.

"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced, broad-
shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a rin that disclosed a set of
sound, white teeth.

"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.

"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no mercy, you
know! When she comes splutterin down, out o your innards. One can't
help bein afraid," he said lauhin.

Several of the men, with briht kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and the
discovery that he did so delihted them.

"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a entleman it's wonderful!
There's a entleman for you!"

"To your places!" cried the youn officer to the men athered round
Pierre.

The youn officer was evidently exercisin his duties for the first or
second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with
reat precision and formality.

The boomin cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were rowin more
intense over the whole field, especially to the left where Baration's
fleches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firin made it
almost impossible to distinuish anythin. Moreover, his whole attention
was enrossed by watchin the family circle--separated from all else--
formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feelin of
joyful animation produced by the sihts and sounds of the battlefield
was now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldier
lyin alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, he
observed the faces of those around him.

By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the
battery; two uns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more
frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.
But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voices
and jokes were heard on all sides.

"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistlin shell approached.

"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud lauhter,
seein the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.

"Are you bowin to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffin a peasant
who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.

Several soldiers athered by the wall of the trench, lookin out to see
what was happenin in front.

"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they, pointin
over the earthwork.

"Mind your own business," an old sereant shouted at them. "If they've
retired it's because there's work for them to do farther back."

And the sereant, takin one of the men by the shoulders, ave him a
shove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of lauhter.

"To the fifth un, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.

"Now then, all toether, like barees!" rose the merry voices of those
who were movin the un.

"Oh, she nearly knocked our entleman's hat off!" cried the red-faced
humorist, showin his teeth chaffin Pierre. "Awkward baae!" he added
reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man's
le.

"Now then, you foxes!" said another, lauhin at some militiamen who,
stoopin low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.

"So this ruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!" they
shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitatin before the man whose le
had been torn off.

"There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like it
at all!"

Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and after
every loss, the liveliness increased more and more.

As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly and
rapidly from an approachin thundercloud, so, as if in opposition to
what was takin place, the lihtnin of hidden fire rowin more and
more intense lowed in the faces of these men.

Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to know
what was happenin there; he was entirely absorbed in watchin this fire
which burned ever more brihtly and which he felt was flamin up in the
same way in his own soul.

At ten o'clock the infantry that had been amon the bushes in front of
the battery and alon the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From the battery
they could be seen runnin back past it carryin their wounded on their
muskets. A eneral with his suite came to the battery, and after
speakin to the colonel ave Pierre an anry look and went away aain
havin ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down, so
as to be less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks of
infantry to the riht of the battery came the sound of a drum and shouts
of command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantry
moved forward.

Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck by
a pale youn officer who, lettin his sword han down, was walkin
backwards and kept lancin uneasily around.

The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their lon-
drawn shout and rapid musketry firin could still be heard. A few
minutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back from
that direction. Projectiles bean to fall still more frequently in the
battery. Several men were lyin about who had not been removed. Around
the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No one any
loner took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted at for bein
in the way. The senior officer moved with bi, rapid strides from one
un to another with a frownin face. The youn officer, with his face
still more flushed, commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. The
soldiers handed up the chares, turned, loaded, and did their business
with strained smartness. They ave little jumps as they walked, as
thouh they were on sprins.

The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire which
Pierre had watched kindle burned up brihtly. Pierre standin beside the
commandin officer. The youn officer, his hand to his shako, ran up to
his superior.

"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eiht rounds are left. Are
we to continue firin?" he asked.

"rapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answerin the question, lookin
over the wall of the trench.

Suddenly somethin happened: the youn officer ave a asp and bendin
double sat down on the round like a bird shot on the win. Everythin
became strane, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.

One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, a
soldier, or a un. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before, now
heard nothin else. On the riht of the battery soldiers shoutin
"Hurrah!" were runnin not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.

A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he was
standin, crumblin down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyes
and at the same instant plumped into somethin. Some militiamen who were
enterin the battery ran back.

"All with rapeshot!" shouted the officer.

The sereant ran up to the officer and in a frihtened whisper informed
him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more of
some wine asked for) that there were no more chares.

"The scoundrels! What are they doin?" shouted the officer, turnin to
Pierre.

The officer's face was red and perspirin and his eyes littered under
his frownin brow.

"Run to the reserves and brin up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled,
anrily avoidin Pierre with his eyes and speakin to his men.

"I'll o," said Pierre.

The officer, without answerin him, strode across to the opposite side.

"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.

The man who had been ordered to o for ammunition stumbled aainst
Pierre.

"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.

Pierre ran after him, avoidin the spot where the youn officer was
sittin.

One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, fallin in front,
beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I oin?"
he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the reen ammunition
waons. He halted irresolutely, not knowin whether to return or o on.
Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the round. At the
same instant he was dazzled by a reat flash of flame, and immediately a
deafenin roar, cracklin, and whistlin made his ears tinle.

When he came to himself he was sittin on the round leanin on his
hands; the ammunition waons he had been approachin no loner existed,
only charred reen boards and ras littered the scorched rass, and a
horse, danlin framents of its shaft behind it, alloped past, while
another horse lay, like Pierre, on the round, utterin proloned and
piercin cries.




CHAPTER XXXII

Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,
as to the only refue from the horrors that surrounded him.

On enterin the earthwork he noticed that there were men doin somethin
there but that no shots were bein fired from the battery. He had no
time to realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lyin on
the earth wall with his back turned as if he were examinin somethin
down below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before was
strulin forward shoutin "Brothers!" and tryin to free himself from
some men who were holdin him by the arm. He also saw somethin else
that was strane.

But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, that
the soldier shoutin "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another man
had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he run
into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspirin man in a blue
uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shoutin somethin. Instinctively
uardin aainst the shock--for they had been runnin toether at full
speed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his hands and seized
the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by the
throat with the other. The officer, droppin his sword, seized Pierre by
his collar.

For some seconds they azed with frihtened eyes at one another's
unfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and what
they were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken him
prisoner?" each was thinkin. But the French officer was evidently more
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre's stron
hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tihter and
tihter. The Frenchman was about to say somethin, when just above their
heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it seemed to Pierre
that the French officer's head had been torn off, so swiftly had he
ducked it.

Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thouht
as to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the battery
and Pierre ran down the slope stumblin over the dead and wounded who,
it seemed to him, cauht at his feet. But before he reached the foot of
the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who,
stumblin, trippin up, and shoutin, ran merrily and wildly toward the
battery. (This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit,
declarin that only his courae and ood luck made such a feat possible:
it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. eore's
Crosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers to
take who ot there.)

The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shoutin
"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficult
to call them back.

The prisoners were brouht down from the battery and amon them was a
wounded French eneral, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of wounded-
-some known to Pierre and some unknown--Russians and French, with faces
distorted by sufferin, walked, crawled, and were carried on stretchers
from the battery. Pierre aain went up onto the knoll where he had spent
over an hour, and of that family circle which had received him as a
member he did not find a sinle one. There were many dead whom he did
not know, but some he reconized. The youn officer still sat in the
same way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the ede of the earth wall.
The red-faced man was still twitchin, but they did not carry him away.

Pierre ran down the slope once more.

"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they have
done!" he thouht, aimlessly oin toward a crowd of stretcher bearers
movin from the battlefield.

But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still hih, and in front and
especially to the left, near Semenovsk, somethin seemed to be seethin
in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, but
even increased to desperation like a man who, strainin himself, shrieks
with all his remainin strenth.




CHAPTER XXXIII

The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fouht within the seven
thousand feet between Borodino and Baration's fleches. Beyond that
space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russians
with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,
Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached and
feeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of the
battlefield. On the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside the
wood, the chief action of the day took place on an open space visible
from both sides and was fouht in the simplest and most artless way.

The battle bean on both sides with a cannonade from several hundred
uns.

Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,
Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French riht, while Murat's
troops advanced on Borodino from their left.

From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standin the fleches were
two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow flies
to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happenin there,
especially as the smoke minlin with the mist hid the whole locality.
The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancin aainst the fleches could
only be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them and
the fleches. As soon as they had descended into that hollow, the smoke
of the uns and musketry on the fleches rew so dense that it covered
the whole approach on that side of it. Throuh the smoke limpses could
be cauht of somethin black--probably men--and at times the lint of
bayonets. But whether they were movin or stationary, whether they were
French or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.

The sun had risen brihtly and its slantin rays struck straiht into
Napoleon's face as, shadin his eyes with his hand, he looked at the
fleches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times it looked as if
the smoke were movin, at times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shouts
were heard throuh the firin, but it was impossible to tell what was
bein done there.

Napoleon, standin on the knoll, looked throuh a field lass, and in
its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimes
Russians, but when he looked aain with the naked eye, he could not tell
where what he had seen was.

He descended the knoll and bean walkin up and down before it.

Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firin, and azed intently at
the battlefield.

But not only was it impossible to make out what was happenin from where
he was standin down below, or from the knoll above on which some of his
enerals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves--in
which by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,
alternately or toether, dead, wounded, alive, frihtened, or maddened--
even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what was
takin place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketry
fire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now infantry,
and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not knowin what
to do with one another, screamed, and ran back aain.

From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from his
marshals, kept allopin up to Napoleon with reports of the proress of
the action, but all these reports were false, both because it was
impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happenin at any iven
moment and because many of the adjutants did not o to the actual place
of conflict but reported what they had heard from others; and also
because while an adjutant was ridin more than a mile to Napoleon
circumstances chaned and the news he brouht was already becomin
false. Thus an adjutant alloped up from Murat with tidins that
Borodino had been occupied and the bride over the Kolocha was in the
hands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished the
troops to cross it? Napoleon ave orders that the troops should form up
on the farther side and wait. But before that order was iven--almost as
soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino--the bride had been
retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierre
had been present at the beinnin of the battle.

An adjutant alloped up from the fleches with a pale and frihtened face
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had been
told that the French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact been
recaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and only
slihtly bruised. On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthy
reports Napoleon ave his orders, which had either been executed before
he ave them or could not be and were not executed.

The marshals and enerals, who were nearer to the field of battle but,
like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fihtin and only
occasionally went within musket rane, made their own arranements
without askin Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction to
fire and where cavalry should allop and infantry should run. But even
their orders, like Napoleon's, were seldom carried out, and then but
partially. For the most part thins happened contrary to their orders.
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meetin rapeshot; soldiers
ordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seein Russians
unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward,
and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flyin Russians.
In this way two cavalry reiments alloped throuh the Semenovsk hollow
and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and
alloped full speed back aain. The infantry moved in the same way,
sometimes runnin to quite other places than those they were ordered to
o to. All orders as to where and when to move the uns, when to send
infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry--all
such orders were iven by the officers on the spot nearest to the units
concerned, without askin either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less
Napoleon. They did not fear ettin into trouble for not fulfillin
orders or for actin on their own initiative, for in battle what is at
stake is what is dearest to man--his own life--and it sometimes seems
that safety lies in runnin back, sometimes in runnin forward; and
these men who were riht in the heat of the battle acted accordin to
the mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forward
and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops. All
their rushin and allopin at one another did little harm, the harm of
disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over
the fields on which these men were flounderin about. As soon as they
left the place where the balls and bullets were flyin about, their
superiors, located in the backround, re-formed them and brouht them
under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them
back to the zone of fire, where under the influence of fear of death
they lost their discipline and rushed about accordin to the chance
promptins of the thron.




CHAPTER XXXIV

Napoleon's enerals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that reion
of fire and sometimes even entered it--repeatedly led into it hue
masses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happened
in their former battles, instead of the news they expected of the
enemy's fliht, these orderly masses returned thence as disoranized and
terrified mobs. The enerals re-formed them, but their numbers
constantly decreased. In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutant
to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.

Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinkin punch, when Murat's
adjutant alloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routed
if His Majesty would let him have another division.

"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, lookin at
the adjutant--a handsome lad with lon black curls arraned like Murat's
own--as thouh he did not understand his words.

"Reinforcements!" thouht Napoleon to himself. "How can they need
reinforcements when they already have half the army directed aainst a
weak, unentrenched Russian win?"

"Tell the Kin of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon yet,
and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. o!..."

The handsome boy adjutant with the lon hair sihed deeply without
removin his hand from his hat and alloped back to where men were bein
slauhtered.

Napoleon rose and havin summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier bean
talkin to them about matters unconnected with the battle.

In the midst of this conversation, which was beinnin to interest
Napoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a eneral with a suite, who
was allopin toward the knoll on a latherin horse. It was Belliard.
Havin dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in a
loud voice bean boldly demonstratin the necessity of sendin
reinforcements. He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if the
Emperor would ive another division.

Napoleon shrued his shoulders and continued to pace up and down
without replyin. Belliard bean talkin loudly and eaerly to the
enerals of the suite around him.

"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he aain came up to
the eneral. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. o
and have another look and then come back to me."

Before Belliard was out of siht, a messener from another part of the
battlefield alloped up.

"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a man
irritated at bein continually disturbed.

"Sire, the prince..." bean the adjutant.

"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an anry esture.

The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and bean to report, but the
Emperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, and
called Berthier.

"We must ive reserves," he said, movin his arms slihtly apart. "Who
do you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom he
subsequently termed "that oslin I have made an eale").

"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all the
division's reiments, and battalions by heart.

Napoleon nodded assent.

The adjutant alloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes later
the Youn uards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleon
azed silently in that direction.

"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Send
Friant's division."

Thouh there was no advantae in sendin Friant's division instead of
Claparede's, and even an obvious inconvenience and delay in stoppin
Claparede and sendin Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.
Napoleon did not notice that in reard to his army he was playin the
part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines--a role he so justly
understood and condemned.

Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke of
the battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at a
allop and as if by areement all said the same thin. They all asked
for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holdin their
positions and maintainin a hellish fire under which the French army was
meltin away.

Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thouht.

M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, havin fasted since mornin,
came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suest lunch to His
Majesty.

"I hope I may now conratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.

Napoleon silently shook his head in neation. Assumin the neation to
refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset ventured
with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not
havin lunch when one can et it.

"o away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.

A beatific smile of reret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. de
Beausset's face and he lided away to the other enerals.

Napoleon was experiencin a feelin of depression like that of an ever-
lucky ambler who, after recklessly flinin money about and always
winnin, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the
ame, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he
loses.

His troops were the same, his enerals the same, the same preparations
had been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courte
et enerique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew that
he was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even the
enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland--yet the terrible
stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.

All the old methods that had been unfailinly crowned with success: the
concentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to break
the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all these
methods had already been employed, yet not only was there no victory,
but from all sides came the same news of enerals killed and wounded, of
reinforcements needed, of the impossibility of drivin back the
Russians, and of disoranization amon his own troops.

Formerly, after he had iven two or three orders and uttered a few
phrases, marshals and adjutants had come allopin up with
conratulations and happy faces, announcin the trophies taken, the
corps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eales and standards, cannon and
stores, and Murat had only beed leave to loose the cavalry to ather
in the baae waons. So it had been at Lodi, Mareno, Arcola, Jena,
Austerlitz, Waram, and so on. But now somethin strane was happenin
to his troops.

Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this was
not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his former
battles. He saw that what he was feelin was felt by all the men about
him experienced in the art of war. All their faces looked dejected, and
they all shunned one another's eyes--only a de Beausset could fail to
rasp the meanin of what was happenin.

But Napoleon with his lon experience of war well knew the meanin of a
battle not ained by the attackin side in eiht hours, after all
efforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and that
the least accident miht now--with the fiht balanced on such a strained
center--destroy him and his army.

When he ran his mind over the whole of this strane Russian campain in
which not one battle had been won, and in which not a fla, or cannon,
or army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at the
concealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of the
Russians still holdin their round--a terrible feelin like a nihtmare
took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that miht destroy
him occurred to his mind. The Russians miht fall on his left win,
miht break throuh his center, he himself miht be killed by a stray
cannon ball. All this was possible. In former battles he had only
considered the possibilities of success, but now innumerable unlucky
chances presented themselves, and he expected them all. Yes, it was like
a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is comin to attack him,
and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knows
should annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless and
limp like a ra, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him in
his helplessness.

The news that the Russians were attackin the left flank of the French
army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstool
below the knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees. Berthier
approached and suested that they should ride alon the line to
ascertain the position of affairs.

"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to brin me my
horse."

He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.

Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersin over the whole space throuh
which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lyin in pools of blood, sinly
or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his enerals had ever before
seen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area. The roar of
uns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and ave a
peculiar sinificance to the spectacle, as music does to tableaux
vivants. Napoleon rode up the hih round at Semenovsk, and throuh the
smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him. They
were Russians.

The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk villae and its
knoll, and their uns boomed incessantly alon their line and sent forth
clouds of smoke. It was no loner a battle: it was a continuous
slauhter which could be of no avail either to the French or the
Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and aain fell into the reverie
from which Berthier had aroused him. He could not stop what was oin on
before him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and to
depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the first
time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.

One of the enerals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to lead
the Old uard into action. Ney and Berthier, standin near Napoleon,
exchaned looks and smiled contemptuously at this eneral's senseless
offer.

Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a lon time.

"At eiht hundred leaues from France, I will not have my uard
destroyed!" he said, and turnin his horse rode back to Shevardino.




CHAPTER XXXV

On the ru-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the mornin sat
Kutuzov, his ray head hanin, his heavy body relaxed. He ave no
orders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suested.

"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: o,
dear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of those
about him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reports
that were brouht him and ave directions when his subordinates demanded
that of him; but when listenin to the reports it seemed as if he were
not interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather in
somethin else--in the expression of face and tone of voice of those who
were reportin. By lon years of military experience he knew, and with
the wisdom of ae understood, that it is impossible for one man to
direct hundreds of thousands of others strulin with death, and he
knew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of a
commander-in-chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor by
the number of cannon or of slauhtered men, but by that intanible force
called the spirit of the army, and he watched this force and uided it
in as far as that was in his power.

Kutuzov's eneral expression was one of concentrated quiet attention,
and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to master
the fatiue of his old and feeble body.

At eleven o'clock they brouht him news that the fleches captured by the
French had been retaken, but that Prince Baration was wounded. Kutuzov
roaned and swayed his head.

"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly," he
said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Wurttember
who was standin behind him.

"Will Your Hihness please take command of the first army?"

Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have reached
Semenovsk--his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that the
duke asked for more troops.

Kutuzov made a rimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over the
command of the first army, and a request to the duke--whom he said he
could not spare at such an important moment--to return to him. When they
brouht him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staff
officers conratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.

"Wait a little, entlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there is
nothin extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better to
wait before we rejoice."

But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.

When Scherbinin came allopin from the left flank with news that the
French had captured the fleches and the villae of Semenovsk, Kutuzov,
uessin by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's looks that the
news was bad, rose as if to stretch his les and, takin Scherbinin's
arm, led him aside.

"o, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether somethin
can't be done."

Kutuzov was in orki, near the center of the Russian position. The
attack directed by Napoleon aainst our left flank had been several
times repulsed. In the center the French had not ot beyond Borodino,
and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to fliht.

Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all who
came from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him,
Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied with
the day's success--a success exceedin his expectations, but the old
man's strenth was failin him. Several times his head dropped low as if
it were fallin and he dozed off. Dinner was brouht him.

Adjutant eneral Wolzoen, the man who when ridin past Prince Andrew
had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Baration so
detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzoen had come from
Barclay de Tolly to report on the proress of affairs on the left flank.
The saacious Barclay de Tolly, seein crowds of wounded men runnin
back and the disordered rear of the army, weihed all the circumstances,
concluded that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to the
commander in chief with that news.

Kutuzov was chewin a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and lanced
at Wolzoen with eyes that brihtened under their puckerin lids.

Wolzoen, nonchalantly stretchin his les, approached Kutuzov with a
half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touchin the peak of his
cap.

He treated his Serene Hihness with a somewhat affected nonchalance
intended to show that, as a hihly trained military man, he left it to
Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whom
he was dealin with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set the ermans
called Kutuzov) "is makin himself very comfortable," thouht Wolzoen,
and lookin severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he bean to
report to "the old entleman" the position of affairs on the left flank
as Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understood
it.

"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannot
dislode them for lack of troops, the men are runnin away and it is
impossible to stop them," he reported.

Kutuzov ceased chewin and fixed an astonished aze on Wolzoen, as if
not understandin what was said to him. Wolzoen, noticin "the old
entleman's" aitation, said with a smile:

"I have not considered it riht to conceal from your Serene Hihness
what I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."

"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted. Frownin and risin
quickly, he went up to Wolzoen.

"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, chokin and makin a threatenin
esture with his tremblin arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? You
know nothin about it. Tell eneral Barclay from me that his information
is incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known to
me, the commander-in-chief, than to him."

Wolzoen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.

"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the riht
flank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say what
you don't know! Be so ood as to ride to eneral Barclay and inform him
of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said Kutuzov
sternly.

All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathin of
the pantin old eneral.

"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank od and our brave army!
The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacred
soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossin himself, and he suddenly sobbed
as his eyes filled with tears.

Wolzoen, shruin his shoulders and curlin his lips, stepped silently
aside, marvelin at "the old entleman's" conceited stupidity.

"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome, dark-
haired eneral who was just ascendin the knoll.

This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important part
of the field of Borodino.

Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holdin their round and
that the French no loner ventured to attack.

After hearin him, Kutuzov said in French:

"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"

"On the contrary, your Hihness, in indecisive actions it is always the
most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in my
opinion..."

"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write out the
order of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued, addressin
another, "ride alon the line and announce that tomorrow we attack."

While Kutuzov was talkin to Raevski and dictatin the order of the day,
Wolzoen returned from Barclay and said that eneral Barclay wished to
have written confirmation of the order the field marshal had iven.

Kutuzov, without lookin at Wolzoen, ave directions for the order to
be written out which the former commander-in-chief, to avoid personal
responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.

And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintains
throuhout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of the
army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, his
order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end of
the army to the other.

It was far from bein the same words or the same order that reached the
farthest links of that chain. The tales passin from mouth to mouth at
different ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said,
but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said was
not the outcome of cunnin calculations, but of a feelin that lay in
the commander-in-chief's soul as in that of every Russian.

And on learnin that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearin
from the hihest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,
the exhausted, waverin men felt comforted and inspirited.




CHAPTER XXXVI

Prince Andrew's reiment was amon the reserves which till after one
o'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artillery
fire. Toward two o'clock the reiment, havin already lost more than two
hundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the ap
between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perished
that day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundred
enemy uns was directed between one and two o'clock.

Without movin from that spot or firin a sinle shot the reiment here
lost another third of its men. From in front and especially from the
riht, in the unliftin smoke the uns boomed, and out of the mysterious
domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissin
cannon balls and slow whistlin shells flew unceasinly. At times, as if
to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed durin which the
cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several men
were torn from the reiment in a minute and the slain were continually
bein draed away and the wounded carried off.

With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those not
yet killed. The reiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundred
paces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one and the same
mood. All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarely heard in the
ranks, and it ceased altoether every time the thud of a successful shot
and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of the time, by their
officers' order, the men sat on the round. One, havin taken off his
shako, carefully loosened the athers of its linin and drew them tiht
aain; another, rubbin some dry clay between his palms, polished his
bayonet; another finered the strap and pulled the buckle of his
bandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his le bands and put his
boots on aain. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed
round, or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. All seemed
fully absorbed in these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when
rows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when reat
masses of the enemy came into view throuh the smoke, no one paid any
attention to these thins. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or
some of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval were
heard on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by
occurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was
as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,
commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passin in front of
the reiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its le over a trace.
"Hey, look at the trace horse!... et her le out! She'll fall.... Ah,
they don't see it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all alon the
reiment. Another time, eneral attention was attracted by a small brown
do, comin heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied manner
in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell
close by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its les, and darted
aside. Yells and shrieks of lauhter rose from the whole reiment. But
such distractions lasted only a moment, and for eiht hours the men had
been inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their pale
and loomy faces rew ever paler and loomier.

Prince Andrew, pale and loomy like everyone in the reiment, paced up
and down from the border of one patch to another, at the ede of the
meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back.
There was nothin for him to do and no orders to be iven. Everythin
went on of itself. The killed were draed from the front, the wounded
carried away, and the ranks closed up. If any soldiers ran to the rear
they returned immediately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew,
considerin it his duty to rouse the courae of the men and to set them
an example, walked about amon the ranks, but he soon became convinced
that this was unnecessary and that there was nothin he could teach
them. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, were
unconsciously bent on avoidin the contemplation of the horrors of their
situation. He walked alon the meadow, drain his feet, rustlin the
rass, and azin at the dust that covered his boots; now he took bi
strides tryin to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the
mowers, then he counted his steps, calculatin how often he must walk
from one strip to another to walk a mile, then he stripped the flowers
from the wormwood that rew alon a boundary rut, rubbed them in his
palms, and smelled their punent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothin remained
of the previous day's thouhts. He thouht of nothin. He listened with
weary ears to the ever-recurrin sounds, distinuishin the whistle of
flyin projectiles from the boomin of the reports, lanced at the
tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and waited.
"Here it comes... this one is comin our way aain!" he thouht,
listenin to an approachin whistle in the hidden reion of smoke. "One,
another! Aain! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No,
it has one over. But this one has hit!" And aain he started tryin to
reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five
paces from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A
chill ran down his back. Aain he lanced at the ranks. Probably many
had been hit--a lare crowd had athered near the second battalion.

"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd toether."

The adjutant, havin obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.
From the other side a battalion commander rode up.

"Look out!" came a frihtened cry from a soldier and, like a bird
whirrin in rapid fliht and alihtin on the round, a shell dropped
with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the
battalion commander's horse. The horse first, reardless of whether it
was riht or wron to show fear, snorted, reared almost throwin the
major, and alloped aside. The horse's terror infected the men.

"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwin himself flat on the round.

Prince Andrew hesitated. The smokin shell spun like a top between him
and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field and
the meadow.

"Can this be death?" thouht Prince Andrew, lookin with a quite new,
envious lance at the rass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smoke
that curled up from the rotatin black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish to
die. I love life--I love this rass, this earth, this air...." He
thouht this, and at the same time remembered that people were lookin
at him.

"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."

He did not finish speakin. At one and the same moment came the sound of
an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breakin window frame, a
suffocatin smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,
raisin his arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran up to him.
From the riht side of his abdomen, blood was wellin out makin a lare
stain on the rass.

The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the
officers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the rass,
breathin heavily and noisily.

"What are you waitin for? Come alon!"

The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and les, but he
moaned piteously and, exchanin looks, they set him down aain.

"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.

They aain took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.

"Ah, od! My od! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My od!"--
voices amon the officers were heard sayin.

"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.

The peasants, adjustin the stretcher to their shoulders, started
hurriedly alon the path they had trodden down, to the dressin station.

"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizin by
their shoulders and checkin the peasants, who were walkin unevenly and
joltin the stretcher.

"et into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant.

"Now that's riht!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had ot into
step.

"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the tremblin voice of Timokhin, who
had run up and was lookin down on the stretcher.

Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the
stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and aain his eyelids
drooped.

The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressin station by the
wood, where waons were stationed. The dressin station consisted of
three tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the ede of a birch wood.
In the wood, waons and horses were standin. The horses were eatin
oats from their movable trouhs and sparrows flew down and pecked the
rains that fell. Some crows, scentin blood, flew amon the birch trees
cawin impatiently. Around the tents, over more than five acres,
bloodstained men in various arbs stood, sat, or lay. Around the wounded
stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentive
faces, whom the officers keepin order tried in vain to drive from the
spot. Disreardin the officers' orders, the soldiers stood leanin
aainst their stretchers and azin intently, as if tryin to comprehend
the difficult problem of what was takin place before them. From the
tents came now loud anry cries and now plaintive roans. Occasionally
dressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to be
brouht in next. The wounded men awaitin their turn outside the tents
roaned, sihed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some were
delirious. Prince Andrew's bearers, steppin over the wounded who had
not yet been bandaed, took him, as a reimental commander, close up to
one of the tents and there stopped, awaitin instructions. Prince Andrew
opened his eyes and for a lon time could not make out what was oin on
around him. He remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the
whirlin black ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life. Two
steps from him, leanin aainst a branch and talkin loudly and
attractin eneral attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-haired
noncommissioned officer with a bandaed head. He had been wounded in the
head and le by bullets. Around him, eaerly listenin to his talk, a
crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was athered.

"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everythin, we rabbed
the Kin himself!" cried he, lookin around him with eyes that littered
with fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads, there
wouldn't have been nothin left of him! I tell you surely..."

Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him with
shinin eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it all the
same now?" thouht he. "And what will be there, and what has there been
here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was somethin in
this life I did not and do not understand."




CHAPTER XXXVII

One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron, holdin
a ciar between the thumb and little finer of one of his small
bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and looked
about him, but above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted a
little respite. After turnin his head from riht to left for some time,
he sihed and looked down.

"All riht, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed Prince
Andrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.

Murmurs arose amon the wounded who were waitin.

"It seems that even in the next world only the entry are to have a
chance!" remarked one.

Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just been
cleared and which a dresser was washin down. Prince Andrew could not
make out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful roans from all
sides and the torturin pain in his thih, stomach, and back distracted
him. All he saw about him mered into a eneral impression of naked,
bleedin human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, as
a few weeks previously, on that hot Auust day, such bodies had filled
the dirty pond beside the Smolensk road. Yes, it was the same flesh, the
same chair a canon, the siht of which had even then filled him with
horror, as by a presentiment.

There were three operatin tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and on
the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was left
alone and involuntarily witnessed what was takin place on the other two
tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judin by
the uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holdin him, and
a spectacled doctor was cuttin into his muscular brown back.

"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" runted the Tartar, and suddenly liftin up his swarthy
snub-nosed face with its hih cheekbones, and barin his white teeth, he
bean to wrile and twitch his body and utter piercin, rinin, and
proloned yells. On the other table, round which many people were
crowdin, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back.
His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head seemed stranely
familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressin on his chest
to hold him down. One lare, white, plump le twitched rapidly all the
time with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbin and chokin
convulsively. Two doctors--one of whom was pale and tremblin--were
silently doin somethin to this man's other, ory le. When he had
finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, the
spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wipin his hands.

He lanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.

"Undress him! What are you waitin for?" he cried anrily to the
dressers.

His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince
Andrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up bean hastily to
undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent down
over the wound, felt it, and sihed deeply. Then he made a sin to
someone, and the torturin pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew to
lose consciousness. When he came to himself the splintered portions of
his thihbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the wound
bandaed. Water was bein sprinkled on his face. As soon as Prince
Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silently on the
lips, and hurried away.

After the sufferins he had been endurin, Prince Andrew enjoyed a
blissful feelin such as he had not experienced for a lon time. All the
best and happiest moments of his life--especially his earliest
childhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leanin
over him his nurse san him to sleep and he, buryin his head in the
pillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life--returned to his
memory, not merely as somethin past but as somethin present.

The doctors were busily enaed with the wounded man the shape of whose
head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were liftin him up and
tryin to quiet him.

"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frihtened moans could
be heard, subdued by sufferin and broken by sobs.

Hearin those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he was
dyin without lory, or because he was sorry to part with life, or
because of those memories of a childhood that could not return, or
because he was sufferin and others were sufferin and that man near him
was roanin so piteously--he felt like weepin childlike, kindly, and
almost happy tears.

The wounded man was shown his amputated le stained with clotted blood
and with the boot still on.

"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.

The doctor who had been standin beside him, preventin Prince Andrew
from seein his face, moved away.

"My od! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.

In the miserable, sobbin, enfeebled man whose le had just been
amputated, he reconized Anatole Kurain. Men were supportin him in
their arms and offerin him a lass of water, but his tremblin, swollen
lips could not rasp its rim. Anatole was sobbin painfully. "Yes, it is
he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,"
thouht Prince Andrew, not yet clearly raspin what he saw before him.
"What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?" he
asked himself without findin an answer. And suddenly a new unexpected
memory from that realm of pure and lovin childhood presented itself to
him. He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at the
ball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frihtened happy
face ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stroner and
more vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered the
connection that existed between himself and this man who was dimly
azin at him throuh tears that filled his swollen eyes. He remembered
everythin, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happy
heart.

Prince Andrew could no loner restrain himself and wept tender lovin
tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors.

"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for those
who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which od preached on
earth and which Princess Mary tauht me and I did not understand--that
is what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for me
had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"




CHAPTER XXXVIII

The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,
toether with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twenty
enerals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and the
consciousness of the impotence of his once mihty arm, produced an
unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at the
killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testin his strenth of
mind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame that
strenth of mind which he thouht constituted his merit and his
reatness. He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to the
Shevardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face swollen
and heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and his voice hoarse,
involuntarily listenin, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firin.
With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which he
rearded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest. A
personal, human feelin for a brief moment ot the better of the
artificial phantasm of life he had served so lon. He felt in his own
person the sufferins and death he had witnessed on the battlefield. The
heaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility of
sufferin and death for himself. At that moment he did not desire
Moscow, or victory, or lory (what need had he for any more lory?). The
one thin he wished for was rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he
had been on the Semenovsk heihts the artillery commander had proposed
to him to brin several batteries of artillery up to those heihts to
strenthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo.
Napoleon had assented and had iven orders that news should be brouht
to him of the effect those batteries produced.

An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred uns had
been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that they
still held their round.

"Our fire is mowin them down by rows, but still they hold on," said the
adjutant.

"They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.

"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.

"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frownin. "Let them have it!"

Even before he ave that order the thin he did not desire, and for
which he ave the order only because he thouht it was expected of him,
was bein done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imainary
reatness, and aain--as a horse walkin a treadmill thinks it is doin
somethin for itself--he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, loomy,
and inhuman role predestined for him.

And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and conscience
darkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happenin
lay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to the end of
his life could he understand oodness, beauty, or truth, or the
sinificance of his actions which were too contrary to oodness and
truth, too remote from everythin human, for him ever to be able to
rasp their meanin. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as they
were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth, oodness, and
all humanity.

Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with men
killed and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as he
looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,
deceivin himself, find reason for rejoicin in the calculation that
there were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day alone did
he write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field was superb,"
because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.
Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote his
leisure to an account of the reat deeds he had done, he wrote:

The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:
it was a war of ood sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity and
security of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.

It was a war for a reat cause, the end of uncertainties and the
beinnin of security. A new horizon and new labors were openin out,
full of well-bein and prosperity for all. The European system was
already founded; all that remained was to oranize it.

Satisfied on these reat points and with tranquility everywhere, I too
should have had my Conress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas were
stolen from me. In that reunion of reat sovereins we should have
discussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account to
the peoples as clerk to master.

Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, and
anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in the
common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all naviable
rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and that
the reat standin armies should be reduced henceforth to mere uards
for the sovereins.

On returnin to France, to the bosom of the reat, stron, manificent,
peaceful, and lorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed her
frontiers immutable; all future wars purely defensive, all
arandizement antinational. I should have associated my son in the
Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutional
rein would have beun.

Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envy
of the nations!

My leisure then, and my old ae, would have been devoted, in company
with the Empress and durin the royal apprenticeship of my son, to
leisurely visitin, with our own horses and like a true country couple,
every corner of the Empire, receivin complaints, redressin wrons, and
scatterin public buildins and benefactions on all sides and
everywhere.

Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the loomy role of executioner
of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the
peoples' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by
the employment of power confer benefactions.

"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further of
the Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,
Bavarians, Wurttemberers, Mecklenburers, Spaniards, Italians, and
Neapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speakin, was one third
composed of Dutch, Belians, men from the borders of the Rhine,
Piedmontese, Swiss, enevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of the
Thirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hambur, and so on: it
included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French. The
Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;
the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various
battles four times more men than the French army; the burnin of Moscow
cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want
in the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian
army also suffered from the severity of the season; so that by the time
it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less
than eihteen thousand."

He imained that the war with Russia came about by his will, and the
horrors that occurred did not staer his soul. He boldly took the whole
responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind found
justification in the belief that amon the hundreds of thousands who
perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.




CHAPTER XXXIX

Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and
various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonin to the Davydov
family and to the crown serfs--those fields and meadows where for
hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, orki, Shevardino, and
Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. At the
dressin stations the rass and earth were soaked with blood for a space
of some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms, wounded and
unwounded, with frihtened faces, draed themselves back to Mozhaysk
from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other. Other crowds,
exhausted and hunry, went forward led by their officers. Others held
their round and continued to fire.

Over the whole field, previously so aily beautiful with the litter of
bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the mornin sun, there now spread a
mist of damp and smoke and a strane acid smell of saltpeter and blood.
Clouds athered and drops of rain bean to fall on the dead and wounded,
on the frihtened, exhausted, and hesitatin men, as if to say: "Enouh,
men! Enouh! Cease... bethink yourselves! What are you doin?"

To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest, it
bean equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue to
slauhter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and the
question arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and be
killed?... You may o and kill whom you please, but I don't want to do
so anymore!" By evenin this thouht had ripened in every soul. At any
moment these men miht have been seized with horror at what they were
doin and miht have thrown up everythin and run away anywhere.

But thouh toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror of
what they were doin, thouh they would have been lad to leave off,
some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, and
they still brouht up the chares, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,
thouh only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and thouh
they stumbled and panted with fatiue, perspirin and stained with blood
and powder. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from both
sides, crushin human bodies, and that terrible work which was not done
by the will of a man but at the will of Him who overns men and worlds
continued.

Anyone lookin at the disoranized rear of the Russian army would have
said that, if only the French made one more sliht effort, it would
disappear; and anyone lookin at the rear of the French army would have
said that the Russians need only make one more sliht effort and the
French would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians made
that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.

The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attackin
the French. At the beinnin of the battle they stood blockin the way
to Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at the
beinnin. But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the French
from their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for all
the Russian troops had been broken up, there was no part of the Russian
army that had not suffered in the battle, and thouh still holdin their
positions they had lost ONE HALF of their army.

The French, with the memory of all their former victories durin fifteen
years, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with the
consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and had
lost only a quarter of their men and still had their uards intact,
twenty thousand stron, miht easily have made that effort. The French
who had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its position
ouht to have made that effort, for as lon as the Russians continued to
block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not been
attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But the French
did not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need only
have used his Old uards, who were intact, and the battle would have
been won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent his
uards is like talkin of what would happen if autumn became sprin. It
could not be. Napoleon did not ive his uards, not because he did not
want to, but because it could not be done. All the enerals, officers,
and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done, because the
flain spirit of the troops would not permit it.

It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nihtmare feelin of
the mihty arm bein stricken powerless, but all the enerals and
soldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,
after all their experience of previous battles--when after one tenth of
such efforts the enemy had fled--experienced a similar feelin of terror
before an enemy who, after losin HALF his men, stood as threateninly
at the end as at the beinnin of the battle. The moral force of the
attackin French army was exhausted. Not that sort of victory which is
defined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, called
standards, and of the round on which the troops had stood and were
standin, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moral
superiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was ained by the
Russians at Borodino. The French invaders, like an infuriated animal
that has in its onslauht received a mortal wound, felt that they were
perishin, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker by
one half, could help swervin. By impetus ained, the French army was
still able to roll forward to Moscow, but there, without further effort
on the part of the Russians, it had to perish, bleedin from the mortal
wound it had received at Borodino. The direct consequence of the battle
of Borodino was Napoleon's senseless fliht from Moscow, his retreat
alon the old Smolensk road, the destruction of the invadin army of
five hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on
which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stroner
spirit had been laid.

BOOK ELEVEN: 1812




CHAPTER I

Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind.
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he
examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the same
time, a lare proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary
division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is a
well known, so-called sophism of the ancients consistin in this, that
Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was followin, in spite
of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise. By the
time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the
tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead of
him: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has covered
another one hundredth, and so on forever. This problem seemed to the
ancients insoluble. The absurd answer (that Achilles could never
overtake the tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was arbitrarily
divided into discontinuous elements, whereas the motion both of Achilles
and of the tortoise was continuous.

By adoptin smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a
solution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when we have admitted
the conception of the infinitely small, and the resultin eometrical
proression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum of
this proression to infinity, do we reach a solution of the problem.

A modern branch of mathematics havin achieved the art of dealin with
the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex
problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.

This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealin
with problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,
and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)
and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannot
avoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead of
examinin continuous motion.

In seekin the laws of historical movement just the same thin happens.
The movement of humanity, arisin as it does from innumerable arbitrary
human wills, is continuous.

To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim of
history. But to arrive at these laws, resultin from the sum of all
those human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnected
units. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selected
series of continuous events and examine it apart from others, thouh
there is and can be no beinnin to any event, for one event always
flows uninterruptedly from another.

The second method is to consider the actions of some one man--a kin or
a commander--as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills; whereas
the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of a
sinle historic personae.

Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continually
takes smaller and smaller units for examination. But however small the
units it takes, we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others,
or to assume a beinnin of any phenomenon, or to say that the will of
many men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personae, is
in itself false.

It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductions
drawn from history. It is merely necessary to select some larer or
smaller unit as the subject of observation--as criticism has every riht
to do, seein that whatever unit history observes must always be
arbitrarily selected.

Only by takin infinitesimally small units for observation (the
differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) and
attainin to the art of interatin them (that is, findin the sum of
these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.

The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present an
extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customary
pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder and
slauhter one another, triumph and are pluned in despair, and for some
years the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensive
movement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause of
this movement, by what laws was it overned? asks the mind of man.

The historians, replyin to this question, lay before us the sayins and
doins of a few dozen men in a buildin in the city of Paris, callin
these sayins and doins "the Revolution"; then they ive a detailed
bioraphy of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;
tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: that
is why this movement took place and those are its laws.

But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, but
plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because in
it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stroner. The sum of
human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum of
those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.

"But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors;
every time there has been a revolution in any state there have been
reat men," says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every time
conquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that the
conquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of a
war in the personal activity of a sinle man. Whenever I look at my
watch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neihborin
church; but because the bells bein to rin when the hands of the clock
reach ten, I have no riht to assume that the movement of the bells is
caused by the position of the hands of the watch.

Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and see
the valves openin and wheels turnin; but I have no riht to conclude
that the whistlin and the turnin of wheels are the cause of the
movement of the enine.

The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late sprin because the oaks
are buddin, and really every sprin cold winds do blow when the oak is
buddin. But thouh I do not know what causes the cold winds to blow
when the oak buds unfold, I cannot aree with the peasants that the
unfoldin of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the force
of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see only a
coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena of
life, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe the
hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the enine, and the
oak, I shall not discover the cause of the bells rinin, the enine
movin, or of the winds of sprin. To that I must entirely chane my
point of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the bells,
and of the wind. History must do the same. And attempts in this
direction have already been made.

To study the laws of history we must completely chane the subject of
our observation, must leave aside kins, ministers, and enerals, and
study the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses are
moved. No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance in
this way toward an understandin of the laws of history; but it is
evident that only alon that path does the possibility of discoverin
the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as much
mental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as has
been devoted to describin the actions of various kins, commanders, and
ministers and propoundin the historians' own reflections concernin
these actions.




CHAPTER II

The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The Russian
army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached, and aain
from Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on to Moscow, its
oal, its impetus ever increasin as it neared its aim, just as the
velocity of a fallin body increases as it approaches the earth. Behind
it were seven hundred miles of huner-stricken, hostile country; ahead
were a few dozen miles separatin it from its oal. Every soldier in
Napoleon's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.

The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatred
of the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the army increased and
consolidated. At Borodino a collision took place. Neither army was
broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after the
collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after collidin with another
havin a reater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball of
invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for some
distance, thouh the collision had deprived it of all its force.

The Russians retreated eihty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the French
reached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeks after that
there was not a sinle battle. The French did not move. As a bleedin,
mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscow
for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back: they
made a dash for the Kalua road, and (after a victory--for at Malo-
Yaroslavets the field of conflict aain remained theirs) without
undertakin a sinle serious battle, they fled still more rapidly back
to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, and
farther still.

On the evenin of the twenty-sixth of Auust, Kutuzov and the whole
Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory.
Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He ave orders to prepare for a
fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,
but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had taken
part in the battle knew it.

But all that evenin and next day reports came in one after another of
unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battle
proved physically impossible.

It was impossible to ive battle before information had been collected,
the wounded athered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, the
slain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had been
killed, and before the men had had food and sleep. And meanwhile, the
very next mornin after the battle, the French army advanced of itself
upon the Russians, carried forward by the force of its own momentum now
seeminly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distance
from its aim. Kutuzov's wish was to attack next day, and the whole army
desired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is not
sufficient, there must also be a possibility of doin it, and that
possibility did not exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's
march, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat another
and a third day's march, and at last, on the first of September when the
army drew near Moscow--despite the strenth of the feelin that had
arisen in all ranks--the force of circumstances compelled it to retire
beyond Moscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day's march, and
abandoned Moscow to the enemy.

For people accustomed to think that plans of campain and battles are
made by enerals--as any one of us sittin over a map in his study may
imaine how he would have arraned thins in this or that battle--the
questions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov durin the retreat not do
this or that? Why did he not take up a position before reachin Fili?
Why did he not retire at once by the Kalua road, abandonin Moscow? and
so on. People accustomed to think in that way foret, or do not know,
the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of any
commander in chief. The activity of a commander-in-chief does not at all
resemble the activity we imaine to ourselves when we sit at ease in our
studies examinin some campain on the map, with a certain number of
troops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and bein our
plans from some iven moment. A commander-in-chief is never dealin with
the beinnin of any event--the position from which we always
contemplate it. The commander-in-chief is always in the midst of a
series of shiftin events and so he never can at any moment consider the
whole import of an event that is occurrin. Moment by moment the event
is imperceptibly shapin itself, and at every moment of this continuous,
uninterrupted shapin of events the commander-in-chief is in the midst
of a most complex play of intriues, worries, continencies,
authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is
continually oblied to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him,
which constantly conflict with one another.

Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov should
have moved his army to the Kalua road lon before reachin Fili, and
that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But a commander
in chief, especially at a difficult moment, has always before him not
one proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all these proposals, based
on strateics and tactics, contradict each other.

A commander-in-chief's business, it would seem, is simply to choose one
of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and time do not
wait. For instance, on the twenty-eihth it is suested to him to cross
to the Kalua road, but just then an adjutant allops up from
Miloradovich askin whether he is to enae the French or retire. An
order must be iven him at once, that instant. And the order to retreat
carries us past the turn to the Kalua road. And after the adjutant
comes the commissary eneral askin where the stores are to be taken,
and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to o, and a
courier from Petersbur brins a letter from the soverein which does
not admit of the possibility of abandonin Moscow, and the commander-in-
chief's rival, the man who is underminin him (and there are always not
merely one but several such), presents a new project diametrically
opposed to that of turnin to the Kalua road, and the commander-in-
chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his enery and a
respectable eneral who has been overlooked in the distribution of
rewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray to
be defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in and
ives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer previously
sent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a eneral who has been on
reconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy's army
differently. People accustomed to misunderstand or to foret these
inevitable conditions of a commander-in-chief's actions describe to us,
for instance, the position of the army at Fili and assume that the
commander-in-chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decide
whether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army
less than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When had
that question been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpably
of all on the twenty-fourth of Auust at Shevardino and on the twenty-
sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of the retreat from
Borodino to Fili.




CHAPTER III

When Ermolov, havin been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position, told
the field marshal that it was impossible to fiht there before Moscow
and that they must retreat, Kutuzov looked at him in silence.

"ive me your hand," said he and, turnin it over so as to feel the
pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you are
sayin!"

Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreatin beyond Moscow
without a battle.

On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Doroomilov ate of Moscow,
Kutuzov ot out of his carriae and sat down on a bench by the roadside.
A reat crowd of enerals athered round him, and Count Rostopchin, who
had come out from Moscow, joined them. This brilliant company separated
into several roups who all discussed the advantaes and disadvantaes
of the position, the state of the army, the plans suested, the
situation of Moscow, and military questions enerally. Thouh they had
not been summoned for the purpose, and thouh it was not so called, they
all felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations all
dealt with public questions. If anyone ave or asked for personal news,
it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to eneral
matters. No jokes, or lauhter, or smiles even, were seen amon all
these men. They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the
heiht the situation demanded. And all these roups, while talkin amon
themselves, tried to keep near the commander-in-chief (whose bench
formed the center of the atherin) and to speak so that he miht
overhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was bein said
and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did not himself
take part in the conversations or express any opinion. After hearin
what was bein said by one or other of these roups he enerally turned
away with an air of disappointment, as thouh they were not speakin of
anythin he wished to hear. Some discussed the position that had been
chosen, criticizin not the position itself so much as the mental
capacity of those who had chosen it. Others arued that a mistake had
been made earlier and that a battle should have been fouht two days
before. Others aain spoke of the battle of Salamanca, which was
described by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform.
(This Frenchman and one of the erman princes servin with the Russian
army were discussin the siee of Saraossa and considerin the
possibility of defendin Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Rostopchin
was tellin a fourth roup that he was prepared to die with the city
train bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could not
help rerettin havin been left in inorance of what was happenin, and
that had he known it sooner thins would have been different.... A fifth
roup, displayin the profundity of their strateic perceptions,
discussed the direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth roup
was talkin absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression rew more and more
preoccupied and loomy. From all this talk he saw only one thin: that
to defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meanin of
those words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any senseless
commander were to ive orders to fiht, confusion would result but the
battle would still not take place. It would not take place because the
commanders not merely all reconized the position to be impossible, but
in their conversations were only discussin what would happen after its
inevitable abandonment. How could the commanders lead their troops to a
field of battle they considered impossible to hold? The lower-rade
officers and even the soldiers (who too reason) also considered the
position impossible and therefore could not o to fiht, fully convinced
as they were of defeat. If Bennisen insisted on the position bein
defended and others still discussed it, the question was no loner
important in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intriue.
This Kutuzov knew well.

Bennisen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russian
patriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincin) by
insistin that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as dayliht
to Kutuzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame on Kutuzov who had
brouht the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without ivin battle; if
it succeeded, to claim the success as his own; or if battle were not
iven, to clear himself of the crime of abandonin Moscow. But this
intriue did not now occupy the old man's mind. One terrible question
absorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone. The
question for him now was: "Have I really allowed Napoleon to reach
Moscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have been
yesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, or was it the evenin
before, when I had a nap and told Bennisen to issue orders? Or was it
earlier still?... When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscow
must be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must be
iven." To ive that terrible order seemed to him equivalent to
resinin the command of the army. And not only did he love power to
which he was accustomed (the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski,
under whom he had served in Turkey, alled him), but he was convinced
that he was destined to save Russia and that that was why, aainst the
Emperor's wish and by the will of the people, he had been chosen
commander-in-chief. He was convinced that he alone could maintain
command of the army in these difficult circumstances, and that in all
the world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear,
and he was horrified at the thouht of the order he had to issue. But
somethin had to be decided, and these conversations around him which
were assumin too free a character must be stopped.

He called the most important enerals to him.

"My head, be it ood or bad, must depend on itself," said he, risin
from the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriaes were waitin.




CHAPTER IV

The Council of War bean to assemble at two in the afternoon in the
better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men, women, and
children of the lare peasant family crowded into the back room across
the passae. Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-old randdauhter whom his
Serene Hihness had petted and to whom he had iven a lump of suar
while drinkin his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in the
larer room. Malasha looked down from the oven with shy deliht at the
faces, uniforms, and decorations of the enerals, who one after another
came into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner under
the icons. "randdad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind called
Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven. He sat, sunk deep
in a foldin armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled at
the collar of his coat which, thouh it was unbuttoned, still seemed to
pinch his neck. Those who entered went up one by one to the field
marshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. His adjutant
Kaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facin
Kutuzov, but the latter moved his hand anrily and Kaysarov understood
that his Serene Hihness did not wish his face to be seen.

Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, and
papers, so many people athered that the orderlies brouht in another
bench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, and Toll, who had
just arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, immediately
under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his hih forehead merin into
his bald crown. He had a St. eore's Cross round his neck and looked
pale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shiverin
and in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, who with rapid esticulations was
ivin him some information, speakin in low tones as they all did.
Chubby little Dokhturov was listenin attentively with eyebrows raised
and arms folded on his stomach. On the other side sat Count Ostermann-
Tolstoy, seeminly absorbed in his own thouhts. His broad head with its
bold features and litterin eyes was restin on his hand. Raevski,
twitchin forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit,
lanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of impatience.
Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome, and kindly face was lit up by a tender,
sly smile. His lance met Malasha's, and the expression of his eyes
caused the little irl to smile.

They were all waitin for Bennisen, who on the pretext of inspectin
the position was finishin his savory dinner. They waited for him from
four till six o'clock and did not bein their deliberations all that
time but talked in low tones of other matters.

Only when Bennisen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner and
draw toward the table, but not near enouh for the candles that had been
placed there to liht up his face.

Bennisen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandon
Russia's ancient and sacred capital without a strule, or are we to
defend it?" A proloned and eneral silence followed. There was a frown
on every face and only Kutuzov's anry runts and occasional couh broke
the silence. All eyes were azin at him. Malasha too looked at
"randdad." She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered; he
seemed about to cry, but this did not last lon.

"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeatin
Bennisen's words in an anry voice and thereby drawin attention to the
false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that that
question has no meanin for a Russian." (He lurched his heavy body
forward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The question
I have asked these entlemen to meet to discuss is a military one. The
question is that of savin Russia. Is it better to ive up Moscow
without a battle, or by acceptin battle to risk losin the army as well
as Moscow? That is the question on which I want your opinion," and he
sank back in his chair.

The discussion bean. Bennisen did not yet consider his ame lost.
Admittin the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at Fili
was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love of
Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the riht to the left flank
durin the niht and attack the French riht flank the followin day.
Opinions were divided, and aruments were advanced for and aainst that
project. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski areed with Bennisen. Whether
feelin it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandonin the capital
or uided by other, personal considerations, these enerals seemed not
to understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course of
events and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned. The other
enerals, however, understood it and, leavin aside the question of
Moscow, spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat.
Malasha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was oin on before her,
understood the meanin of the council differently. It seemed to her that
it was only a personal strule between "randdad" and "Lon-coat" as
she termed Bennisen. She saw that they rew spiteful when they spoke to
one another, and in her heart she sided with "randdad." In the midst of
the conversation she noticed "randdad" ive Bennisen a quick, subtle
lance, and then to her joys she saw that "randdad" said somethin to
"Lon-coat" which settled him. Bennisen suddenly reddened and paced
anrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov's calm
and quiet comment on the advantae or disadvantae of Bennisen's
proposal to move troops by niht from the riht to the left flank to
attack the French riht win.

"entlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan. Movin
troops in close proximity to an enemy is always danerous, and military
history supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzov seemed to reflect,
searchin for an example, then with a clear, naive look at Bennisen he
added: "Oh yes; take the battle of Friedland, which I think the count
well remembers, and which was... not fully successful, only because our
troops were rearraned too near the enemy..."

There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very lon to them all.

The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they all
felt that there was no more to be said.

Durin one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sih as if preparin to
speak. They all looked at him.

"Well, entlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the broken
crockery," said he, and risin slowly he moved to the table. "entlemen,
I have heard your views. Some of you will not aree with me. But I," he
paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my Soverein and country,
order a retreat."

After that the enerals bean to disperse with the solemnity and
circumspect silence of people who are leavin, after a funeral.

Some of the enerals, in low tones and in a strain very different from
the way they had spoken durin the council, communicated somethin to
their commander-in-chief.

Malasha, who had lon been expected for supper, climbed carefully
backwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catchin at its
projections, and slippin between the les of the enerals she darted
out of the room.

When he had dismissed the enerals Kutuzov sat a lon time with his
elbows on the table, thinkin always of the same terrible question:
"When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable? When was
that done which settled the matter? And who was to blame for it?"

"I did not expect this," said he to his adjutant Schneider when the
latter came in late that niht. "I did not expect this! I did not think
this would happen."

"You should take some rest, your Serene Hihness," replied Schneider.

"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimed
Kutuzov without replyin, strikin the table with his pody fist. "They
shall too, if only..."




CHAPTER V

At that very time, in circumstances even more important than retreatin
without a battle, namely the evacuation and burnin of Moscow,
Rostopchin, who is usually represented as bein the instiator of that
event, acted in an altoether different manner from Kutuzov.

After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burnin of Moscow was
as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fihtin.

Every Russian miht have predicted it, not by reasonin but by the
feelin implanted in each of us and in our fathers.

The same thin that took place in Moscow had happened in all the towns
and villaes on Russian soil beinnin with Smolensk, without the
participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets. The people
awaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excited or tear
anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feelin within it the strenth to
find what it should do at that most difficult moment. And as soon as the
enemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandonin their property,
while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left.

The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was and
is present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of this,
and a forebodin that Moscow would be taken, was present in Russian
Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already in July and
at the beinnin of Auust showed that they expected this. Those who
went away, takin what they could and abandonin their houses and half
their belonins, did so from the latent patriotism which expresses
itself not by phrases or by ivin one's children to save the fatherland
and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, oranically,
and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results.

"It is disraceful to run away from daner; only cowards are runnin
away from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchin
impressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamed
to be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowin it
had to be done. Why did they o? It is impossible to suppose that
Rostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon had
committed in conquered countries. The first people to o away were the
rich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin had
remained intact and that durin Napoleon's occupation the inhabitants
had spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charmin Frenchmen
whom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked so
much.

They went away because for Russians there could be no question as to
whether thins would o well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It was
out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst thin
that could happen. They went away even before the battle of Borodino and
still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's calls to defend Moscow
or the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-workin icon of
the Iberian Mother of od and o to fiht, or of the balloons that were
to destroy the French, and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote in
his broadsheets. They knew that it was for the army to fiht, and that
if it could not succeed it would not do to take youn ladies and house
serfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fiht Napoleon, and that
they must o away, sorry as they were to abandon their property to
destruction. They went away without thinkin of the tremendous
sinificance of that immense and wealthy city bein iven over to
destruction, for a reat city with wooden buildins was certain when
abandoned by its inhabitants to be burned. They went away each on his
own account, and yet it was only in consequence of their oin away that
the momentous event was accomplished that will always remain the
reatest lory of the Russian people. The lady who, afraid of bein
stopped by Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in June moved with her
Neroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with a
vaue consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,
simply, and truly carryin out the reat work which saved Russia. But
Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
overnment offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to the
drunken rabble; now had processions displayin the icons, and now
forbade Father Auustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; now
seized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-six
of them removed the balloon that was bein constructed by Leppich; now
hinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to his
own house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraidin
them for havin destroyed his Orphanae; now claimed the lory of havin
hinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed; now
ordered the people to catch all spies and brin them to him, and now
reproached them for doin so; now expelled all the French residents from
Moscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the whole
French colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable old
postmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particular
offense; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fiht the French
and now, to et rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed and
himself drove away by a back ate; now declared that he would not
survive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albums
concernin his share in the affair--this man did not understand the
meanin of what was happenin but merely wanted to do somethin himself
that would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic feat;
and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable event--
the abandonment and burnin of Moscow--and tried with his puny hand now
to speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore him alon
with it.




CHAPTER VI

Helene, havin returned with the court from Vilna to Petersbur, found
herself in a difficult position.

In Petersbur she had enjoyed the special protection of a randee who
occupied one of the hihest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she had formed
an intimacy with a youn forein prince. When she returned to Petersbur
both the manate and the prince were there, and both claimed their
rihts. Helene was faced by a new problem--how to preserve her intimacy
with both without offendin either.

What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman did
not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who evidently
deserved her reputation of bein a very clever woman. Had she attempted
concealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position by
cunnin, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledin herself
uilty. But Helene, like a really reat man who can do whatever he
pleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as she
sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.

The first time the youn foreiner allowed himself to reproach her, she
lifted her beautiful head and, half turnin to him, said firmly: "That's
just like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothin else. A woman
sacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! What
riht have you, monseineur, to demand an account of my attachments and
friendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!" The
prince was about to say somethin, but Helene interrupted him.

"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments for me
than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut my door
on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with inratitude!
Know, monseineur, that in all that relates to my intimate feelins I
render account only to od and to my conscience," she concluded, layin
her hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and lookin up to
heaven.

"But for heaven's sake listen to me!"

"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"

"But that's impossible."

"You won't dein to demean yourself by marryin me, you..." said Helene,
beinnin to cry.

The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distrauht,
said throuh her tears that there was nothin to prevent her marryin,
that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but she
mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personaes), that she had
never been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed.

"But the law, reliion..." said the prince, already yieldin.

"The law, reliion... What have they been invented for if they can't
arrane that?" said Helene.

The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,
and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,
with whom he was on intimate terms.

A few days later at one of those enchantin fetes which Helene ave at
her country house on the Stone Island, the charmin Monsieur de Jobert,
a man no loner youn, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes, a
Jesuit a robe courte * was presented to her, and in the arden by the
liht of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for a
lon time of the love of od, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of the
consolations the one true Catholic reliion affords in this world and
the next. Helene was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyes
and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,
for which her partner came to seek her, put an end to her discourse with
her future directeur de conscience, but the next evenin Monsieur de
Jobert came to see Helene when she was alone, and after that often came
aain.


* Lay member of the Society of Jesus.

One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where she knelt
down before the altar to which she was led. The enchantin, middle-aed
Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterward
described it, she felt somethin like a fresh breeze wafted into her
soul. It was explained to her that this was la race.

After that a lon-frocked abbe was brouht to her. She confessed to him,
and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a box
containin the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her to
partake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she had
now been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days the
Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.

All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attention
devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,
refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she wore
only white dresses and white ribbons all that time) ave her pleasure,
but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to foret her aim. And
as it always happens in contests of cunnin that a stupid person ets
the better of cleverer ones, Helene--havin realized that the main
object of all these words and all this trouble was, after convertin her
to Catholicism, to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions (as to
which she received indications)-before partin with her money insisted
that the various operations necessary to free her from her husband
should be performed. In her view the aim of every reliion was merely to
preserve certain proprieties while affordin satisfaction to human
desires. And with this aim, in one of her talks with her Father
Confessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she
bound by her marriae?

They were sittin in the twiliht by a window in the drawin room. The
scent of flowers came in at the window. Helene was wearin a white
dress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, a well-fed
man with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth, and white
hands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Helene and, with a subtle
smile on his lips and a peaceful look of deliht at her beauty,
occasionally lanced at her face as he explained his opinion on the
subject. Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and his
plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected the
conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe, thouh he evidently
enjoyed the beauty of his companion, was absorbed in his mastery of the
matter.

The course of the Father Confessor's aruments ran as follows: "Inorant
of the import of what you were undertakin, you made a vow of conjual
fidelity to a man who on his part, by enterin the married state without
faith in the reliious sinificance of marriae, committed an act of
sacrilee. That marriae lacked the dual sinificance it should have
had. Yet in spite of this your vow was bindin. You swerved from it.
What did you commit by so actin? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venial
sin, for you acted without evil intention. If now you married aain with
the object of bearin children, your sin miht be foriven. But the
question is aain a twofold one: firstly..."

But suddenly Helene, who was ettin bored, said with one of her
bewitchin smiles: "But I think that havin espoused the true reliion I
cannot be bound by what a false reliion laid upon me."

The director of her conscience was astounded at havin the case
presented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' e. He was
delihted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil's proress, but could
not abandon the edifice of arument he had laboriously constructed.

"Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, and
bean refutin his spiritual dauhter's aruments.




CHAPTER VII

Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy from the
ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were makin
difficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matter
would be rearded by the secular authorities.

So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society.
She provoked the jealousy of the elderly manate and told him what she
had told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter so that the only
way for him to obtain a riht over her was to marry her. The elderly
manate was at first as much taken aback by this suestion of marriae
with a woman whose husband was alive, as the youner man had been, but
Helene's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as
marryin a maiden had its effect on him too. Had Helene herself shown
the least sin of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause would
certainly have been lost; but not only did she show no sins of secrecy
or shame, on the contrary, with ood-natured naivete she told her
intimate friends (and these were all Petersbur) that both the prince
and the manate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was
afraid of rievin either.

A rumor immediately spread in Petersbur, not that Helene wanted to be
divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would have
opposed so illeal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate and
interestin Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry.
The question was no loner whether this was possible, but only which was
the better match and how the matter would be rearded at court. There
were, it is true, some riid individuals unable to rise to the heiht of
such a question, who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament
of marriae, but there were not many such and they remained silent,
while the majority were interested in Helene's ood fortune and in the
question which match would be the more advantaeous. Whether it was
riht or wron to remarry while one had a husband livin they did not
discuss, for that question had evidently been settled by people "wiser
than you or me," as they said, and to doubt the correctness of that
decision would be to risk exposin one's stupidity and incapacity to
live in society.

Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had come to Petersbur that
summer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express an
opinion contrary to the eneral one. Meetin Helene at a ball she
stopped her in the middle of the room and, amid eneral silence, said in
her ruff voice: "So wives of livin men have started marryin aain!
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have been
forestalled, my dear! It was thouht of lon ao. It is done in all the
brothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turnin up her wide
sleeves with her usual threatenin esture and lancin sternly round,
moved across the room.

Thouh people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was rearded in
Petersbur as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,
and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had used, supposin
the whole stin of her remark to lie in that word.

Prince Vasili, who of late very often forot what he had said and
repeated one and the same thin a hundred times, remarked to his
dauhter whenever he chanced to see her:

"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead her aside,
drawin her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projects
concernin... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father's
heart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much.... But, my
dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to say," and
concealin his unvaryin emotion he would press his cheek aainst his
dauhter's and move away.

Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedinly clever man,
and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman as
Helene always has--men friends who can never chane into lovers--once
ave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate atherin.

"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that sort
by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,
berined finers. "Tell me, as you would a sister, what I ouht to do.
Which of the two?"

Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with a
smile on his lips.

"You are not takin me unawares, you know," said he. "As a true friend,
I have thouht and thouht aain about your affair. You see, if you
marry the prince"--he meant the youner man--and he crooked one finer,
"you forever lose the chance of marryin the other, and you will
displease the court besides. (You know there is some kind of
connection.) But if you marry the old count you will make his last days
happy, and as widow of the rand... the prince would no loner be makin
a mesalliance by marryin you," and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead.

"That's a true friend!" said Helene beamin, and aain touchin
Bilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want to distress
either of them. I would ive my life for the happiness of them both."

Bilibin shrued his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he could
help in that difficulty.

"Une maitresse-femme! * That's what is called puttin thins squarely.
She would like to be married to all three at the same time," thouht he.


* A masterly woman.

"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin asked,
his reputation bein so well established that he did not fear to ask so
naive a question. "Will he aree?"

"Oh, he loves me so!" said Helene, who for some reason imained that
Pierre too loved her. "He will do anythin for me."

Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for somethin witty.

"Even divorce you?" said he.

Helene lauhed.

Amon those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposed
marriae was Helene's mother, Princess Kuraina. She was continually
tormented by jealousy of her dauhter, and now that jealousy concerned a
subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to the
idea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorce
and remarriae durin a husband's lifetime, and the priest told her that
it was impossible, and to her deliht showed her a text in the ospel
which (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriae while the husband
is alive.

Armed with these aruments, which appeared to her unanswerable, she
drove to her dauhter's early one mornin so as to find her alone.

Havin listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly and
ironically.

"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced...'"
said the old princess.

"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rien. Dans ma
position j'ai des devoirs," * said Helene chanin from Russian, in
which lanuae she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear,
into French which suited it better.


* "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand anythin. In my
position I have obliations."

"But, my dear...."

"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who has
the riht to rant dispensations..."

Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announce
that His Hihness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.

"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuse contre
lui, parce qu'il m'a manque parole." *


* "No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with him for not
keepin his word to me."

"Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde," * said a fair-haired youn man
with a lon face and nose, as he entered the room.


* "Countess, there is mercy for every sin."

The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied. The youn man who had
entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her dauhter and
sidled out of the room.

"Yes, she is riht," thouht the old princess, all her convictions
dissipated by the appearance of His Hihness. "She is riht, but how is
it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is so
simple," she thouht as she ot into her carriae.

By the beinnin of Auust Helene's affairs were clearly defined and she
wrote a letter to her husband--who, as she imained, loved her very
much--informin him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her havin
embraced the one true faith, and askin him to carry out all the
formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to him by
the bearer of the letter.

And so I pray od to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerful
keepin--Your friend Helene.

This letter was brouht to Pierre's house when he was on the field of
Borodino.




CHAPTER VIII

Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, havin run down from
Raevski's battery a second time, made his way throuh a ully to
Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressin station, and
seein blood and hearin cries and roans hurried on, still entanled in
the crowds of soldiers.

The one thin he now desired with his whole soul was to et away quickly
from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and return
to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his own
bed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he be
able to understand himself and all he had seen and felt. But such
ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.

Thouh shells and bullets did not whistle over the road alon which he
was oin, still on all sides there was what there had been on the field
of battle. There were still the same sufferin, exhausted, and sometimes
stranely indifferent faces, the same blood, the same soldiers'
overcoats, the same sounds of firin which, thouh distant now, still
aroused terror, and besides this there were the foul air and the dust.

Havin one a couple of miles alon the Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat down
by the roadside.

Dusk had fallen, and the roar of uns died away. Pierre lay leanin on
his elbow for a lon time, azin at the shadows that moved past him in
the darkness. He was continually imainin that a cannon ball was flyin
toward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. He
had no idea how lon he had been there. In the middle of the niht three
soldiers, havin brouht some firewood, settled down near him and bean
lihtin a fire.

The soldiers, who threw sidelon lances at Pierre, ot the fire to burn
and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread and
put a little drippin. The pleasant odor of reasy viands minled with
the smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sihed. The three soldiers were
eatin and talkin amon themselves, takin no notice of him.

"And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidently
meanin what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eat
we'll ive you some food, only let us know whether you are an honest
man."

"I, I..." said Pierre, feelin it necessary to minimize his social
position as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers and
better understood by them. "By rihts I am a militia officer, but my men
are not here. I came to the battle and have lost them."

"There now!" said one of the soldiers.

Another shook his head.

"Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, and handed
Pierre a wooden spoon after lickin it clean.

Pierre sat down by the fire and bean eatin the mash, as they called
the food in the cauldron, and he thouht it more delicious than any food
he had ever tasted. As he sat bendin reedily over it, helpin himself
to lare spoonfuls and chewin one after another, his face was lit up by
the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.

"Where have you to o to? Tell us!" said one of them.

"To Mozhaysk."

"You're a entleman, aren't you?"

"Yes."

"And what's your name?"

"Peter Kirilych."

"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come alon with us, we'll take you there."

In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.

By the time they ot near Mozhaysk and bean ascendin the steep hill
into the town, the cocks were already crowin. Pierre went on with the
soldiers, quite forettin that his inn was at the bottom of the hill
and that he had already passed it. He would not soon have remembered
this, such was his state of foretfulness, had he not halfway up the
hill stumbled upon his room, who had been to look for him in the town
and was returnin to the inn. The room reconized Pierre in the
darkness by his white hat.

"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beinnin to despair! How is
it you are on foot? And where are you oin, please?"

"Oh, yes!" said Pierre.

The soldiers stopped.

"So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, ood-by, Peter
Kirilych--isn't it?"

"ood-bye, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.

"ood-bye!" he said and turned with his room toward the inn.

"I ouht to ive them somethin!" he thouht, and felt in his pocket.
"No, better not!" said another, inner voice.

There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.
Pierre went out into the yard and, coverin himself up head and all, lay
down in his carriae.




CHAPTER IX

Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself
fallin asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality,
he heard the boom, boom, boom of firin, the thud of projectiles, roans
and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a feelin of horror and
dread of death seized him. Filled with friht he opened his eyes and
lifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Only
someone's orderly passed throuh the ateway, splashin throuh the mud,
and talked to the innkeeper. Above Pierre's head some pieons, disturbed
by the movement he had made in sittin up, fluttered under the dark roof
of the penthouse. The whole courtyard was permeated by a stron peaceful
smell of stable yards, delihtful to Pierre at that moment. He could see
the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.

"Thank od, there is no more of that!" he thouht, coverin up his head
aain. "Oh, what a terrible thin is fear, and how shamefully I yielded
to it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time, to the
end..." thouht he.

They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the
battery, those who had iven him food, and those who had prayed before
the icon. They, those strane men he had not previously known, stood out
clearly and sharply from everyone else.

"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thouht Pierre as he fell asleep, "to
enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what
they are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden of my
outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could have run
away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I miht have been sent to serve
as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And the memory of the dinner
at the Enlish Club when he had challened Dolokhov flashed throuh
Pierre's mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok. And now
a picture of a solemn meetin of the lode presented itself to his mind.
It was takin place at the Enlish Club and someone near and dear to him
sat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor. But
he died!" thouht Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he was
alive. How sorry I am that he died, and how lad I am that he is alive
aain!" On one side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski,
Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the cateory to which these
men beloned was as clearly defined in his mind as the cateory of those
he termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov,
shoutin and sinin loudly; yet throuh their shoutin the voice of his
benefactor was heard speakin all the time and the sound of his words
was as weihty and uninterrupted as the boomin on the battlefield, but
pleasant and comfortin. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor
was sayin, but he knew (the cateories of thouhts were also quite
distinct in his dream) that he was talkin of oodness and the
possibility of bein what they were. And they with their simple, kind,
firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But thouh they were
kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishin to
speak and to attract their attention, he ot up, but at that moment his
les rew cold and bare.

He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his les from which his cloak
had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranin his cloak Pierre
opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, but
now they were all bluish, lit up, and litterin with frost or dew.

"It is dawn," thouht Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want to
hear and understand my benefactor's words." Aain he covered himself up
with his cloak, but now neither the lode nor his benefactor was there.
There were only thouhts clearly expressed in words, thouhts that
someone was utterin or that he himself was formulatin.

Afterwards when he recalled those thouhts Pierre was convinced that
someone outside himself had spoken them, thouh the impressions of that
day had evoked them. He had never, it seemed to him, been able to think
and express his thouhts like that when awake.

"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom to
the law of od," the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission to the
will of od; you cannot escape from Him. And they are simple. They do
not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is olden.
Man can be master of nothin while he fears death, but he who does not
fear it possesses all. If there were no sufferin, man would not know
his limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thin (Pierre went
on thinkin, or hearin, in his dream) is to be able in your soul to
unite the meanin of all. To unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not to
unite. Thouhts cannot be united, but to harness all these thouhts
toether is what we need! Yes, one must harness them, must harness
them!" he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feelin that these
words and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved the
question that tormented him.

"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness."

"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!"
some voice was repeatin. "We must harness, it is time to harness...."

It was the voice of the room, tryin to wake him. The sun shone
straiht into Pierre's face. He lanced at the dirty innyard in the
middle of which soldiers were waterin their lean horses at the pump
while carts were passin out of the ate. Pierre turned away with
repunance, and closin his eyes quickly fell back on the carriae seat.
"No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that. I want
to understand what was revealin itself to me in my dream. One second
more and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,
but how can I harness everythin?" and Pierre felt with horror that the
meanin of all he had seen and thouht in the dream had been destroyed.

The room, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer
had come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that
our men were leavin it.

Pierre ot up and, havin told them to harness and overtake him, went on
foot throuh the town.

The troops were movin on, leavin about ten thousand wounded behind
them. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and
the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts that
were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows could
be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriae, which had overtaken
him, to a wounded eneral he knew, and drove with him to Moscow. On the
way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of
that of Prince Andrew.




CHAPTER X

On the thirteenth of Auust Pierre reached Moscow. Close to the ates of
the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.

"We have been lookin for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "The count
wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at once on a
very important matter."

Without oin home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscow
commander-in-chief.

Count Rostopchin had only that mornin returned to town from his summer
villa at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house were
full of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders.
Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to him
that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to be
surrendered. Thouh this news was bein concealed from the inhabitants,
the officials--the heads of the various overnment departments--knew
that Moscow would soon be in the enemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin
himself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all come
to the overnor to ask how they were to deal with their various
departments.

As Pierre was enterin the reception room a courier from the army came
out of Rostopchin's private room.

In answer to questions with which he was reeted, the courier made a
despairin esture with his hand and passed throuh the room.

While waitin in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched the
various officials, old and youn, military and civilian, who were there.
They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to a roup of
men, one of whom he knew. After reetin Pierre they continued their
conversation.

"If they're sent out and brouht back aain later on it will do no harm,
but as thins are now one can't answer for anythin."

"But you see what he writes..." said another, pointin to a printed
sheet he held in his hand.

"That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said the
first.

"What is it?" asked Pierre.

"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."

Pierre took it and bean readin.

His Serene Hihness has passed throuh Mozhaysk in order to join up with
the troops movin toward him and has taken up a stron position where
the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty eiht uns with ammunition
have been sent him from here, and his Serene Hihness says he will
defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fiht in
the streets. Do not be upset, brothers, that the law courts are closed;
thins have to be put in order, and we will deal with villains in our
own way! When the time comes I shall want both town and peasant lads and
will raise the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not wanted yet
so I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a huntin spear not bad, but a
three-proned fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a
sheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of the
Mother of od to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will
have some water blessed. That will help them to et well quicker. I,
too, am well now: one of my eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout
with both.

"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fiht in the
town," said Pierre, "and that the position..."

"Well, of course! That's what we were sayin," replied the first
speaker.

"And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am on the
lookout with both'?" asked Pierre.

"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smilin, "and was very much
upset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter with
him. By the by, Count," he added suddenly, addressin Pierre with a
smile, "we heard that you have family troubles and that the countess,
your wife..."

"I have heard nothin," Pierre replied unconcernedly. "But what have you
heard?"

"Oh, well, you know people often invent thins. I only say what I
heard."

"But what did you hear?"

"Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile, "that the
countess, your wife, is preparin to o abroad. I expect it's
nonsense...."

"Possibly," remarked Pierre, lookin about him absent-mindedly. "And who
is that?" he asked, indicatin a short old man in a clean blue peasant
overcoat, with a bi snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face.

"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant keeper,
Vereshchain. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with the
proclamation."

"Oh, so that is Vereshchain!" said Pierre, lookin at the firm, calm
face of the old man and seekin any indication of his bein a traitor.

"That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrote the
proclamation," said the adjutant. "The youn man is in prison and I
expect it will o hard with him."

An old entleman wearin a star and another official, a erman wearin a
cross round his neck, approached the speaker.


"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "That
proclamation appeared about two months ao. The count was informed of
it. He ave orders to investiate the matter. abriel Ivanovich here
made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed throuh exactly sixty-
three hands. He asked one, 'From whom did you et it?' 'From so-and-so.'
He went to the next one. 'From whom did you et it?' and so on till he
reached Vereshchain, a half educated tradesman, you know, 'a pet of a
trader,'" said the adjutant smilin. "They asked him, 'Who ave it you?'
And the point is that we knew whom he had it from. He could only have
had it from the Postmaster. But evidently they had come to some
understandin. He replied: 'From no one; I made it up myself.' They
threatened and questioned him, but he stuck to that: 'I made it up
myself.' And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.
'From whom did you et the proclamation?' 'I wrote it myself.' Well, you
know the count," said the adjutant cheerfully, with a smile of pride,
"he flared up dreadfully--and just think of the fellow's audacity,
lyin, and obstinacy!"

"And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev? I understand!"
said Pierre.

"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had his own
sins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.
But the point is that the count was much annoyed. 'How could you have
written it yourself?' said he, and he took up the Hambur azette that
was lyin on the table. 'Here it is! You did not write it yourself but
translated it, and translated it abominably, because you don't even know
French, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have not
read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that's so, you're a traitor
and I'll have you tried, and you'll be haned! Say from whom you had
it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up myself.' And that was the end
of it. The count had the father fetched, but the fellow stuck to it. He
was sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now the
father has come to intercede for him. But he's a ood-for-nothin lad!
You know that sort of tradesman's son, a dandy and lady-killer. He
attended some lectures somewhere and imaines that the devil is no match
for him. That's the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop
here by the Stone Bride, and you know there was a lare icon of od
Almihty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other.
Well, he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do?
He found some scoundrel of a painter..."




CHAPTER XI

In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander in
chief.

When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckerin his face,
was rubbin his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man was sayin
somethin, but when Pierre entered he stopped speakin and went out.

"Ah, how do you do, reat warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as the short
man had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. But that's not
the point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belon to the Masons?" he
went on severely, as thouh there were somethin wron about it which he
nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. "I am well
informed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hope
that you are not one of those who on pretense of savin mankind wish to
ruin Russia."

"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied.

"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs. Speranski and
Manitski have been deported to their proper place. Mr. Klyucharev has
been treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea of
buildin up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple of
their fatherland. You can understand that there are reasons for this and
that I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmful
person. It has now come to my knowlede that you lent him your carriae
for his removal from town, and that you have even accepted papers from
him for safe custody. I like you and don't wish you any harm and--as you
are only half my ae--I advise you, as a father would, to cease all
communication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon as
possible."

"But what did Klyucharev do wron, Count?" asked Pierre.

"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted Rostopchin.

"If he is accused of circulatin Napoleon's proclamation it is not
proved that he did so," said Pierre without lookin at Rostopchin, "and
Vereshchain..."

"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,
frownin suddenly. "Vereshchain is a reneade and a traitor who will be
punished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heat with which
people speak when recallin an insult. "But I did not summon you to
discuss my actions, but to ive you advice--or an order if you prefer
it. I be you to leave the town and break off all communication with
such men as Klyucharev. And I will knock the nonsense out of anybody"--
but probably realizin that he was shoutin at Bezukhov who so far was
not uilty of anythin, he added, takin Pierre's hand in a friendly
manner, "We are on the eve of a public disaster and I haven't time to be
polite to everybody who has business with me. My head is sometimes in a
whirl. Well, mon cher, what are you doin personally?"

"Why, nothin," answered Pierre without raisin his eyes or chanin the
thouhtful expression of his face.

The count frowned.

"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can, that's
all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. ood-bye, my dear
fellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted throuh the doorway after Pierre, "is
it true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holy
fathers of the Society of Jesus?"

Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen and anry
than he had ever before shown himself.

When he reached home it was already ettin dark. Some eiht people had
come to see him that evenin: the secretary of a committee, the colonel
of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.
They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him. Pierre
did not understand and was not interested in any of these questions and
only answered them in order to et rid of these people. When left alone
at last he opened and read his wife's letter.

"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that old
man... Simplicity is submission to od. Sufferin is necessary... the
meanin of all... one must harness... my wife is ettin married... One
must foret and understand..." And oin to his bed he threw himself on
it without undressin and immediately fell asleep.

When he awoke next mornin the major-domo came to inform him that a
special messener, a police officer, had come from Count Rostopchin to
know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leavin the town.

A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaitin him in the
drawin room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of oin to see
them, went to the back porch and out throuh the ate.

From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one of
Bezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre aain
or knew where he was.




CHAPTER XII

The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,
till the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.

After Petya had joined Obolenski's reiment of Cossacks and left for
Belaya Tserkov where that reiment was formin, the countess was seized
with terror. The thouht that both her sons were at the war, had both
one from under her win, that today or tomorrow either or both of them
miht be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struck
her that summer for the first time with cruel clearness. She tried to
et Nicholas back and wished to o herself to join Petya, or to et him
an appointment somewhere in Petersbur, but neither of these proved
possible. Petya could not return unless his reiment did so or unless he
was transferred to another reiment on active service. Nicholas was
somewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,
in which he had iven a detailed account of his meetin with Princess
Mary. The countess did not sleep at niht, or when she did fall asleep
dreamed that she saw her sons lyin dead. After many consultations and
conversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her. He
ot Petya transferred from Obolenski's reiment to Bezukhov's, which was
in trainin near Moscow. Thouh Petya would remain in the service, this
transfer would ive the countess the consolation of seein at least one
of her sons under her win, and she hoped to arrane matters for her
Petya so as not to let him o aain, but always et him appointed to
places where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As lon as
Nicholas alone was in daner the countess imained that she loved her
first-born more than all her other children and even reproached herself
for it; but when her younest: the scaperace who had been bad at
lessons, was always breakin thins in the house and makin himself a
nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Petya with his merry black eyes
and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beinnin to show--when
he was thrown amid those bi, dreadful, cruel men who were fihtin
somewhere about somethin and apparently findin pleasure in it--then
his mother thouht she loved him more, much more, than all her other
children. The nearer the time came for Petya to return, the more uneasy
rew the countess. She bean to think she would never live to see such
happiness. The presence of Sonya, of her beloved Natasha, or even of her
husband irritated her. "What do I want with them? I want no one but
Petya," she thouht.

At the end of Auust the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas.
He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procure
remounts, but that letter did not set the countess at ease. Knowin that
one son was out of daner she became the more anxious about Petya.

Thouh by the twentieth of Auust nearly all the Rostovs' acquaintances
had left Moscow, and thouh everybody tried to persuade the countess to
et away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leavin before
her treasure, her adored Petya, returned. On the twenty-eihth of Auust
he arrived. The passionate tenderness with which his mother received him
did not please the sixteen-year-old officer. Thouh she concealed from
him her intention of keepin him under her win, Petya uessed her
desins, and instinctively fearin that he miht ive way to emotion
when with her--miht "become womanish" as he termed it to himself--he
treated her coldly, avoided her, and durin his stay in Moscow attached
himself exclusively to Natasha for whom he had always had a particularly
brotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.

Owin to the count's customary carelessness nothin was ready for their
departure by the twenty-eihth of Auust and the carts that were to come
from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their household
belonins did not arrive till the thirtieth.

From the twenty-eihth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustle
and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino were
brouht in by the Doroomilov ate and taken to various parts of Moscow,
and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessions
out by the other ates. In spite of Rostopchin's broadsheets, or because
of them or independently of them, the stranest and most contradictory
rumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowed
to leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons had
been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.
Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which the
French had been routed, while others on the contrary reported that the
Russian army had been destroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia
which, preceded by the clery, would o to the Three Hills; others
whispered that Auustin had been forbidden to leave, that traitors had
been seized, that the peasants were riotin and robbin people on their
way from Moscow, and so on. But all this was only talk; in reality
(thouh the Council of Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,
had not yet been held) both those who went away and those who remained
behind felt, thouh they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly be
abandoned, and that they ouht to et away as quickly as possible and
save their belonins. It was felt that everythin would suddenly break
up and chane, but up to the first of September nothin had done so. As
a criminal who is bein led to execution knows that he must die
immediately, but yet looks about him and straihtens the cap that is
awry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,
thouh it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the
conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would
be completely upset.

Durin the three days precedin the occupation of Moscow the whole
Rostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of the
family, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collectin
the current rumors from all sides and ave superficial and hasty orders
at home about the preparations for their departure.

The countess watched the thins bein packed, was dissatisfied with
everythin, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always runnin
away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his
time. Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by ettin
thins packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent.
Nicholas' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited, in
her presence, joyous comments from the countess, who saw an intervention
of Providence in this meetin of the princess and Nicholas.

"I was never pleased at Bolkonski's enaement to Natasha," said the
countess, "but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had a
presentiment that it would happen. What a ood thin it would be!"

Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrievin
the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marryin a rich woman, and that the
princess was a ood match. It was very bitter for her. But despite her
rief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on herself all the
difficult work of directin the storin and packin of their thins and
was busy for whole days. The count and countess turned to her when they
had any orders to ive. Petya and Natasha on the contrary, far from
helpin their parents, were enerally a nuisance and a hindrance to
everyone. Almost all day lon the house resounded with their runnin
feet, their cries, and their spontaneous lauhter. They lauhed and were
ay not because there was any reason to lauh, but because aiety and
mirth were in their hearts and so everythin that happened was a cause
for aiety and lauhter to them. Petya was in hih spirits because
havin left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine
youn man, because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov
where there was no hope of soon takin part in a battle and had come to
Moscow where there was to be fihtin in a few days, and chiefly because
Natasha, whose lead he always followed, was in hih spirits. Natasha was
ay because she had been sad too lon and now nothin reminded her of
the cause of her sadness, and because she was feelin well. She was also
happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others was
a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run freely--
and Petya adored her. Above all, they were ay because there was a war
near Moscow, there would be fihtin at the town ates, arms were bein
iven out, everybody was escapin--oin away somewhere, and in eneral
somethin extraordinary was happenin, and that is always excitin,
especially to the youn.




CHAPTER XIII

On Saturday, the thirty-first of Auust, everythin in the Rostovs'
house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture was
bein carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and pictures had been
taken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, wrappin paper, and
ropes were scattered about. The peasants and house serfs carryin out
the thins were treadin heavily on the parquet floors. The yard was
crowded with peasant carts, some loaded hih and already corded up,
others still empty.

The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants who
had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in the
yard and in the house. The count had been out since mornin. The
countess had a headache brouht on by all the noise and turmoil and was
lyin down in the new sittin room with a vinear compress on her head.
Petya was not at home, he had one to visit a friend with whom he meant
to obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sonya was in
the ballroom lookin after the packin of the lass and china. Natasha
was sittin on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, ribbons,
and scarves strewn all about her, azin fixedly at the floor and
holdin in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) which
she had worn at her first Petersbur ball.

Natasha was ashamed of doin nothin when everyone else was so busy, and
several times that mornin had tried to set to work, but her heart was
not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anythin except
with all her heart and all her miht. For a while she had stood beside
Sonya while the china was bein packed and tried to help, but soon ave
it up and went to her room to pack her own thins. At first she found it
amusin to ive away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that was
done and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull.

"Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyasha
willinly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on the floor,
took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to what
ouht to have occupied her thouhts now. She was roused from her reverie
by the talk of the maids in the next room (which was theirs) and by the
sound of their hurried footsteps oin to the back porch. Natasha ot up
and looked out of the window. An enormously lon row of carts full of
wounded men had stopped in the street.

The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,
postilions, and scullions stood at the ate, starin at the wounded.

Natasha, throwin a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holdin
an end of it in each hand, went out into the street.

The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out of the
crowd by the ate, one up to a cart with a hood constructed of bast
mats, and was speakin to a pale youn officer who lay inside. Natasha
moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holdin her
handkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was sayin.

"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was sayin. "You would be more
comfortable somewhere in a house... in ours, for instance... the family
are leavin."

"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weak
voice. "Here is our commandin officer... ask him," and he pointed to a
stout major who was walkin back alon the street past the row of carts.

Natasha lanced with frihtened eyes at the face of the wounded officer
and at once went to meet the major.

"May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.

The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.

"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwin up his eyes and
smilin.

Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole manner
were so serious, thouh she was still holdin the ends of her
handkerchief, that the major ceased smilin and after some reflection--
as if considerin in how far the thin was possible--replied in the
affirmative.

"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.

With a sliht inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back quickly to
Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talkin compassionately to the officer.

"They may. He says they may!" whispered Natasha.

The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard, and
dozens of carts with wounded men bean at the invitation of the
townsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of the
houses in Povarskaya Street. Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealin
with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life. She and Mavra
Kuzminichna tried to et as many of the wounded as possible into their
yard.

"Your Papa must be told, thouh," said Mavra Kuzminichna.

"Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can move
into the drawin room. They can have all our half of the house."

"There now, youn lady, you do take thins into your head! Even if we
put them into the win, the men's room, or the nurse's room, we must ask
permission."

"Well, I'll ask."

Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe throuh the half-open door
into the sittin room, where there was a smell of vinear and Hoffman's
drops.

"Are you asleep, Mamma?"

"Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, wakin up just as she was droppin
into a doze.

"Mamma darlin!" said Natasha, kneelin by her mother and brinin her
face close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forive me, I'll never do it
aain; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me: they have brouht
some wounded here--officers. Will you let them come? They have nowhere
to o. I knew you'd let them come!" she said quickly all in one breath.

"What officers? Whom have they brouht? I don't understand anythin
about it," said the countess.

Natasha lauhed, and the countess too smiled slihtly.

"I knew you'd ive permission... so I'll tell them," and, havin kissed
her mother, Natasha ot up and went to the door.

In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.

"We've stayed too lon!" said the count with involuntary vexation. "The
club is closed and the police are leavin."

"Papa, is it all riht--I've invited some of the wounded into the
house?" said Natasha.

"Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. I be
you not to indule in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow we
must o, o, o!...."

And the count ave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.

At dinner Petya havin returned home told them the news he had heard. He
said the people had been ettin arms in the Kremlin, and that thouh
Rostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or three
days in advance, the order had certainly already been iven for everyone
to o armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a bi
battle there.

The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eaer, excited face
as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his not
oin to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thouht of the impendin
enaement) he would say somethin about men, honor, and the fatherland-
-somethin senseless, masculine, and obstinate which there would be no
contradictin, and her plans would be spoiled; and so, hopin to arrane
to leave before then and take Petya with her as their protector and
defender, she did not answer him, but after dinner called the count
aside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly, that very
niht if possible. With a woman's involuntary lovin cunnin she, who
till then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of friht if
they did not leave that very niht. Without any pretense she was now
afraid of everythin.




CHAPTER XIV

Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her dauhter, increased the
countess' fears still more by tellin what she had seen at a spirit
dealer's in Myasnitski Street. When returnin by that street she had
been unable to pass because of a drunken crowd riotin in front of the
shop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and the
cabman had told her that the people were breakin open the barrels at
the drink store, havin received orders to do so.

After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastic
haste packin their belonins and preparin for their departure. The
old count, suddenly settin to work, kept passin from the yard to the
house and back aain, shoutin confused instructions to the hurryin
people, and flurryin them still more. Petya directed thins in the
yard. Sonya, owin to the count's contradictory orders, lost her head
and did not know what to do. The servants ran noisily about the house
and yard, shoutin and disputin. Natasha, with the ardor characteristic
of all she did suddenly set to work too. At first her intervention in
the business of packin was received skeptically. Everybody expected
some prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely and
passionately demanded obedience, rew anry and nearly cried because
they did not heed her, and at last succeeded in makin them believe her.
Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established her
authority, was the packin of the carpets. The count had valuable
obelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natasha set to
work two cases were standin open in the ballroom, one almost full up
with crockery, the other with carpets. There was also much china
standin on the tables, and still more was bein brouht in from the
storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had one to fetch it.

"Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everythin into these," said Natasha.

"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant.

"No, wait a minute, please."

And Natasha bean rapidly takin out of the case dishes and plates
wrapped in paper.

"The dishes must o in here amon the carpets," said she.

"Why, it's a mercy if we can et the carpets alone into three cases,"
said the butler's assistant.

"Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha bean rapidly and deftly sortin out the
thins. "These aren't needed," said she, puttin aside some plates of
Kiev ware. "These--yes, these must o amon the carpets," she said,
referrin to the Saxony china dishes.

"Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll et it all packed," ured Sonya
reproachfully.

"What a youn lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.

But Natasha would not ive in. She turned everythin out and bean
quickly repackin, decidin that the inferior Russian carpets and
unnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everythin had
been taken out of the cases, they recommenced packin, and it turned out
that when the cheaper thins not worth takin had nearly all been
rejected, the valuable ones really did all o into the two cases. Only
the lid of the case containin the carpets would not shut down. A few
more thins miht have been taken out, but Natasha insisted on havin
her own way. She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's assistant
and Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of packin--press on the
lid, and made desperate efforts herself.

"That's enouh, Natasha," said Sonya. "I see you were riht, but just
take out the top one."

"I won't!" cried Natasha, with one hand holdin back the hair that hun
over her perspirin face, while with the other she pressed down the
carpets. "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" she cried.

The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natasha, clappin her hands,
screamed with deliht and tears fell from her eyes. But this only lasted
a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted her
completely. The count was not anry even when they told him that Natasha
had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came to her to
ask whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and whether it miht be
corded up. Thanks to Natasha's directions the work now went on
expeditiously, unnecessary thins were left, and the most valuable
packed as compactly as possible.

But hard as they all worked till quite late that niht, they could not
et everythin packed. The countess had fallen asleep and the count,
havin put off their departure till next mornin, went to bed.

Sonya and Natasha slept in the sittin room without undressin.

That niht another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, and Mavra
Kuzminichna, who was standin at the ate, had him brouht into the
Rostovs' yard. Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a very important
man. He was bein conveyed in a caleche with a raised hood, and was
quite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerable
old attendant. A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriae in a
cart.

"Please come in here. The masters are oin away and the whole house
will be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant.

"Well, perhaps," said he with a sih. "We don't expect to et him home
alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a lon way from
here, and there's nobody livin in it."

"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everythin in the
master's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?" she
asked.

The attendant made a hopeless esture.

"We don't expect to et him home! We must ask the doctor."

And the old servant ot down from the box and went up to the cart.

"All riht!" said the doctor.

The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook his head
disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and stopped
beside Mavra Kuzminichna.

"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.

She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.

"The masters won't object..." she said.

But they had to avoid carryin the man upstairs, and so they took him
into the win and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss'.

This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkonski.




CHAPTER XV

Moscow's last day had come. It was a clear briht autumn day, a Sunday.
The church bells everywhere were rinin for service, just as usual on
Sundays. Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city.

Only two thins indicated the social condition of Moscow--the rabble,
that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. An enormous crowd
of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,
seminarists, and entry were minled, had one early that mornin to the
Three Hills. Havin waited there for Rostopchin who did not turn up,
they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and then
dispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops. Prices
too that day indicated the state of affairs. The price of weapons, of
old, of carts and horses, kept risin, but the value of paper money and
city articles kept fallin, so that by midday there were instances of
carters removin valuable oods, such as cloth, and receivin in payment
a half of what they carted, while peasant horses were fetchin five
hundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were bein
iven away for nothin.

In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of former
conditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfs the only
indication was that three out of their hue retinue disappeared durin
the niht, but nothin was stolen; and as to the value of their
possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come in from their
estates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable and
they were offered enormous sums of money for them. Not only were hue
sums offered for the horses and carts, but on the previous evenin and
early in the mornin of the first of September, orderlies and servants
sent by wounded officers came to the Rostovs' and wounded men draed
themselves there from the Rostovs' and from neihborin houses where
they were accommodated, entreatin the servants to try to et them a
lift out of Moscow. The major-domo to whom these entreaties were
addressed, thouh he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,
sayin that he dare not even mention the matter to the count. Pity these
wounded men as one miht, it was evident that if they were iven one
cart there would be no reason to refuse another, or all the carts and
one's own carriaes as well. Thirty carts could not save all the wounded
and in the eneral catastrophe one could not disreard oneself and one's
own family. So thouht the major-domo on his master's behalf.

On wakin up that mornin Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly, so
as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward mornin,
and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressin own. In the yard
stood the carts ready corded. The carriaes were at the front porch. The
major-domo stood at the porch talkin to an elderly orderly and to a
pale youn officer with a bandaed arm. On seein the count the major-
domo made a sinificant and stern esture to them both to o away.

"Well, Vasilich, is everythin ready?" asked the count, and strokin his
bald head he looked ood-naturedly at the officer and the orderly and
nodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)

"We can harness at once, your excellency."

"Well, that's riht. As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, od
willin! What is it, entlemen?" he added, turnin to the officer. "Are
you stayin in my house?"

The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.

"Count, be so ood as to allow me... for od's sake, to et into some
corner of one of your carts! I have nothin here with me.... I shall be
all riht on a loaded cart..."

Before the officer had finished speakin the orderly made the same
request on behalf of his master.

"Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be very pleased,
very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.
Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said the count, mutterin
some indefinite order.

But at the same moment an expression of warm ratitude on the officer's
face had already sealed the order. The count looked around him. In the
yard, at the ates, at the window of the wins, wounded officers and
their orderlies were to be seen. They were all lookin at the count and
movin toward the porch.

"Please step into the allery, your excellency," said the major-domo.
"What are your orders about the pictures?"

The count went into the house with him, repeatin his order not to
refuse the wounded who asked for a lift.

"Well, never mind, some of the thins can be unloaded," he added in a
soft, confidential voice, as thouh afraid of bein overheard.

At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, who had
been her lady's maid before her marriae and now performed a sort of
chief endarme's duty for her, came to say that Madame Schoss was much
offended and the youn ladies' summer dresses could not be left behind.
On inquiry, the countess learned that Madame Schoss was offended because
her trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads were
bein uncorded and the luae taken out of the carts to make room for
wounded men whom the count in the simplicity of his heart had ordered
that they should take with them. The countess sent for her husband.

"What is this, my dear? I hear that the luae is bein unloaded."

"You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officer
came to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours are
thins that can be bouht but think what bein left behind means to
them!... Really now, in our own yard--we asked them in ourselves and
there are officers amon them.... You know, I think, my dear... let them
be taken... where's the hurry?"

The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talkin of money matters.
The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news of
somethin detrimental to the children's interests, such as the buildin
of a new allery or conservatory, the inauuration of a private theater
or an orchestra. She was accustomed always to oppose anythin announced
in that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so.

She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:
"Listen to me, Count, you have manaed matters so that we are ettin
nothin for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our--all the
children's property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousand
rubles' worth of thins in the house. I don't consent, my dear, I don't!
Do as you please! It's the overnment's business to look after the
wounded; they know that. Look at the Lopukhins opposite, they cleared
out everythin two days ao. That's what other people do. It's only we
who are such fools. If you have no pity on me, have some for the
children."

Flourishin his arms in despair the count left the room without
replyin.

"Papa, what are you doin that for?" asked Natasha, who had followed him
into her mother's room.

"Nothin! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count anrily.

"But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?"

"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.

Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered.

"Papa! Here's Ber comin to see us," said she, lookin out of the
window.




CHAPTER XVI

Ber, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearin the orders
of Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and areeable post
of assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of the
first division of the Second Army.

On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.

He had nothin to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone in the
army was askin for leave to visit Moscow and had somethin to do there.
So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family and
domestic reasons.

Ber drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trap
with a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. He
looked attentively at the carts in the yard and while oin up to the
porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.

From the anteroom Ber ran with smooth thouh impatient steps into the
drawin room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natasha
and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.

"Health, at a time like this?" said the count. "Come, tell us the news!
Is the army retreatin or will there be another battle?"

"od Almihty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa," said
Ber. "The army is burnin with a spirit of heroism and the leaders, so
to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what is comin. But
in eneral I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the truly
antique valor of the Russian army, which they--which it" (he corrected
himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle of the twenty-sixth--
there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you, Papa" (he smote
himself on the breast as a eneral he had heard speakin had done, but
Ber did it a trifle late for he should have struck his breast at the
words "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, the commanders, far
from havin to ure the men on or anythin of that kind, could hardly
restrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique valor," he
went on rapidly. "eneral Barclay de Tolly risked his life everywhere at
the head of the troops, I can assure you. Our corps was stationed on a
hillside. You can imaine!"

And Ber related all that he remembered of the various tales he had
heard those days. Natasha watched him with an intent aze that confused
him, as if she were tryin to find in his face the answer to some
question.

"Altoether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors cannot
be imained or adequately praised!" said Ber, lancin round at
Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replyin to her intent
look with a smile. "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts of
her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.

Just then the countess came in from the sittin room with a weary and
dissatisfied expression. Ber hurriedly jumped up, kissed her hand,
asked about her health, and, swayin his head from side to side to
express sympathy, remained standin beside her.

"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times for
every Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have still time to et
away...."

"I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess, turnin
to her husband. "I have just been told that nothin is ready yet.
Somebody after all must see to thins. One misses Mitenka at such times.
There won't be any end to it."

The count was about to say somethin, but evidently restrained himself.
He ot up from his chair and went to the door.

At that moment Ber drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nose
and, seein the knot in it, pondered, shakin his head sadly and
sinificantly.

"And I have a reat favor to ask of you, Papa," said he.

"Hm..." said the count, and stopped.

"I was drivin past Yusupov's house just now," said Ber with a lauh,
"when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn't
buy somethin. I went in out of curiosity, you know, and there is a
small chiffonier and a dressin table. You know how dear Vera wanted a
chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it." (At the mention
of the chiffonier and dressin table Ber involuntarily chaned his tone
to one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arranements.) "And it's
such a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret Enlish drawer, you know!
And dear Vera has lon wanted one. I wish to ive her a surprise, you
see. I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard. Please let me
have one, I will pay the man well, and..."

The count frowned and couhed.

"Ask the countess, I don't ive orders."

"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Ber. "Only I so wanted it,
for dear Vera's sake."

"Oh, o to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the devil..."
cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"

And he left the room. The countess bean to cry.

"Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Ber.

Natasha left the room with her father and, as if findin it difficult to
reach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.

Petya was in the porch, enaed in ivin out weapons to the servants
who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still standin in the
yard. Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbin
into one of them helped by an orderly.

"Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.

She understood that he meant what were their parents quarrelin about.
She did not answer.

"It's because Papa wanted to ive up all the carts to the wounded," said
Petya. "Vasilich told me. I consider..."

"I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turnin her anry face to
Petya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don't know what.
Are we despicable ermans?"

Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakenin and
lettin the force of her aner run to waste, she turned and rushed
headlon up the stairs.

Ber was sittin beside the countess consolin her with the respectful
attention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, was pacin up and down
the room, when Natasha, her face distorted by aner, burst in like a
tempest and approached her mother with rapid steps.

"It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. "You can't possibly have
ordered it!"

Ber and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frihtened. The count
stood still at the window and listened.

"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is oin on in the yard!" she cried.
"They will be left!..."

"What's the matter with you? Who are 'they'? What do you want?"

"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No, Mamma
darlin, it's not the thin. Please forive me, darlin.... Mamma, what
does it matter what we take away? Only look what is oin on in the
yard... Mamma!... It's impossible!"

The count stood by the window and listened without turnin round.
Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.

The countess lanced at her dauhter, saw her face full of shame for her
mother, saw her aitation, and understood why her husband did not turn
to look at her now, and she lanced round quite disconcerted.

"Oh, do as you like! Am I hinderin anyone?" she said, not surrenderin
at once.

"Mamma, darlin, forive me!"

But the countess pushed her dauhter away and went up to her husband.

"My dear, you order what is riht.... You know I don't understand about
it," said she, droppin her eyes shamefacedly.

"The es... the es are teachin the hen," muttered the count throuh
tears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was lad to hide her look of
shame on his breast.

"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We will still
take all the most necessary thins."

The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at which
she used to run when playin at ta, ran throuh the ballroom to the
anteroom and downstairs into the yard.

The servants athered round Natasha, but could not believe the strane
order she brouht them until the count himself, in his wife's name,
confirmed the order to ive up all the carts to the wounded and take the
trunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servants
set to work at this new task with pleasure and zeal. It no loner seemed
strane to them but on the contrary it seemed the only thin that could
be done, just as a quarter of an hour before it had not seemed strane
to anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the oods carted
away but that had seemed the only thin to do.

The whole household, as if to atone for not havin done it sooner, set
eaerly to work at the new task of placin the wounded in the carts. The
wounded draed themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale but
happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to be had spread
to the neihborin houses, from which wounded men bean to come into the
Rostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the carts
but only to let them sit on the top of the thins. But the work of
unloadin, once started, could not be arrested. It seemed not to matter
whether all or only half the thins were left behind. Cases full of
china, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully packed
the niht before now lay about the yard, and still they went on
searchin for and findin possibilities of unloadin this or that and
lettin the wounded have another and yet another cart.

"We can take four more men," said the steward. "They can have my trap,
or else what is to become of them?"

"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha can o
with me in the carriae."

They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from a
house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was briht
and animated. Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as she
had not known for a lon time.

"What could we fasten this onto?" asked the servants, tryin to fix a
trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriae. "We must keep at least
one cart."

"What's in it?" asked Natasha.

"The count's books."

"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."

The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where Count
Peter could sit.

"On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" cried Natasha.

Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts was quite
different from Natasha's. She was puttin away the thins that had to be
left behind and makin a list of them as the countess wished, and she
tried to et as much taken away with them as possible.




CHAPTER XVII

Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriaes, packed
full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One by one
the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.

The caleche in which Prince Andrew was bein taken attracted Sonya's
attention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she was
arranin a seat for the countess in the hue hih coach that stood at
the entrance.

"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leanin out of the carriae
window.

"Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the maid. "The wounded prince: he
spent the niht in our house and is oin with us."

"But who is it? What's his name?"

"It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he is
dyin," replied the maid with a sih.

Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,
tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey, was
pacin up and down the drawin room, waitin for the household to
assemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before startin.
Natasha was not in the room.

"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He is
oin with us."

The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizin Sonya's arm, lanced
around.

"Natasha?" she murmured.

At that moment this news had only one sinificance for both of them.
They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heard
this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.

"Natasha does not know yet, but he is oin with us," said Sonya.

"You say he is dyin?"

Sonya nodded.

The countess put her arms around Sonya and bean to cry.

"The ways of od are past findin out!" she thouht, feelin that the
Almihty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becomin manifest in all that was
now takin place.

"Well, Mamma? Everythin is ready. What's the matter?" asked Natasha, as
with animated face she ran into the room.

"Nothin," answered the countess. "If everythin is ready let us start."

And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her aitated face. Sonya
embraced Natasha and kissed her.

Natasha looked at her inquirinly.

"What is it? What has happened?"

"Nothin... No..."

"Is it somethin very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha with
her quick intuition.

Sonya sihed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss, Mavra
Kuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawin room and, havin closed
the doors, they all sat down and remained for some moments silently
seated without lookin at one another.

The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sih crossed himself
before the icon. All the others did the same. Then the count embraced
Mavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow, and while
they cauht at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backs
lihtly with some vauely affectionate and comfortin words. The
countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on her knees
before the icons that had been left here and there hanin on the wall.
(The most precious ones, with which some family tradition was connected,
were bein taken with them.)

In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with swords
and daers, with trousers tucked inside their hih boots and with belts
and irdles tihtened, were takin leave of those remainin behind.

As is always the case at a departure, much had been forotten or put in
the wron place, and for a lon time two menservants stood one on each
side of the open door and the carriae steps waitin to help the
countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the house
to the carriaes, the caleche, the phaeton, and back aain.

"They always will foret everythin!" said the countess. "Don't you know
I can't sit like that?"

And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, without replyin but with an
arieved look on her face, hastily ot into the coach to rearrane the
seat.

"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swayin his head.

Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted to
drive her, sat perched up hih on the box and did not so much as lance
round at what was oin on behind him. From thirty years' experience he
knew it would be some time yet before the order, "Be off, in od's
name!" would be iven him: and he knew that even when it was said he
would be stopped once or twice more while they sent back to fetch
somethin that had been forotten, and even after that he would aain be
stopped and the countess herself would lean out of the window and be
him for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew all
this and therefore waited calmly for what would happen, with more
patience than the horses, especially the near one, the chestnut Falcon,
who was pawin the round and champin his bit. At last all were seated,
the carriae steps were folded and pulled up, the door was shut,
somebody was sent for a travelin case, and the countess leaned out and
said what she had to say. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and
bean crossin himself. The postilion and all the other servants did the
same. "Off, in od's name!" said Efim, puttin on his hat. "Start!" The
postilion started the horses, the off pole horse tued at his collar,
the hih sprins creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footman
spran onto the box of the movin coach which jolted as it passed out of
the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in their
turn, and the procession of carriaes moved up the street. In the
carriaes, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as they
passed the church opposite the house. Those who were to remain in Moscow
walked on either side of the vehicles seein the travelers off.

Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feelin as now, sittin in
the carriae beside the countess and azin at the slowly recedin walls
of forsaken, aitated Moscow. Occasionally she leaned out of the
carriae window and looked back and then forward at the lon train of
wounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the line she could see
the raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche. She did not know who was in
it, but each time she looked at the procession her eyes souht that
caleche. She knew it was riht in front.

In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets came
several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and as they
passed alon the Sadovaya Street the carriaes and carts formed two rows
abreast.

As they were oin round the Sukharev water tower Natasha, who was
inquisitively and alertly scrutinizin the people drivin or walkin
past, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:

"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!"

"Who? Who?"

"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, puttin her head
out of the carriae and starin at a tall, stout man in a coachman's
lon coat, who from his manner of walkin and movin was evidently a
entleman in disuise, and who was passin under the arch of the
Sukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced, beardless old man
in a frieze coat.

"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a queer-lookin
old boy. Really," said Natasha, "look, look!"

"No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?"

"Mamma," screamed Natasha, "I'll stake my head it's he! I assure you!
Stop, stop!" she cried to the coachman.

But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Street came
more carts and carriaes, and the Rostovs were bein shouted at to move
on and not block the way.

In fact, however, thouh now much farther off than before, the Rostovs
all saw Pierre--or someone extraordinarily like him--in a coachman's
coat, oin down the street with head bent and a serious face beside a
small, beardless old man who looked like a footman. That old man noticed
a face thrust out of the carriae window azin at them, and
respectfully touchin Pierre's elbow said somethin to him and pointed
to the carriae. Pierre, evidently enrossed in thouht, could not at
first understand him. At lenth when he had understood and looked in the
direction the old man indicated, he reconized Natasha, and followin
his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. But
havin taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember somethin and stopped.

Natasha's face, leanin out of the window, beamed with quizzical
kindliness.

"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have reconized you! This is
wonderful!" she cried, holdin out her hand to him. "What are you doin?
Why are you like this?"

Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walked
alon beside her while the coach still moved on.

"What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised and
commiseratin tone.

"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round at
Natasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was conscious
without lookin at her--filled him with enchantment.

"Are you remainin in Moscow, then?"

Pierre hesitated.

"In Moscow?" he said in a questionin tone. "Yes, in Moscow. ood-bye!"

"Ah, if only I were a man! I'd certainly stay with you. How splendid!"
said Natasha. "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"

Pierre lanced absently at Natasha and was about to say somethin, but
the countess interrupted him.

"You were at the battle, we heard."

"Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will be another battle
tomorrow..." he bean, but Natasha interrupted him.

"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself...."

"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow... But
no! ood-bye, ood-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" and droppin
behind the carriae he stepped onto the pavement.

Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a lon time, beamin at
him with her kindly, slihtly quizzical, happy smile.




CHAPTER XVIII

For the last two days, ever since leavin home, Pierre had been livin
in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev. This is how it
happened.

When he woke up on the mornin after his return to Moscow and his
interview with Count Rostopchin, he could not for some time make out
where he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed that
amon others awaitin him in his reception room there was a Frenchman
who had brouht a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene, he felt
suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to which
he was apt to succumb. He felt that everythin was now at an end, all
was in confusion and crumblin to pieces, that nobody was riht or
wron, the future held nothin, and there was no escape from this
position. Smilin unnaturally and mutterin to himself, he first sat
down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went to the door
of the reception room and peeped throuh the crack, returned flourishin
his arms, and took up a book. His major-domo came in a second time to
say that the Frenchman who had brouht the letter from the countess was
very anxious to see him if only for a minute, and that someone from
Bazdeev's widow had called to ask Pierre to take chare of her husband's
books, as she herself was leavin for the country.

"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... o and say I will
come directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.

But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat which
was lyin on the table and went out of his study by the other door.
There was no one in the passae. He went alon the whole lenth of this
passae to the stairs and, frownin and rubbin his forehead with both
hands, went down as far as the first landin. The hall porter was
standin at the front door. From the landin where Pierre stood there
was a second staircase leadin to the back entrance. He went down that
staircase and out into the yard. No one had seen him. But there were
some carriaes waitin, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the ate
the coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps to
him. When he felt he was bein looked at he behaved like an ostrich
which hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hun his head
and quickenin his pace went down the street.

Of all the affairs awaitin Pierre that day the sortin of Joseph
Bazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.

He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to o to the
Patriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.

Continually turnin round to look at the rows of loaded carts that were
makin their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancin his bulky
body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,
experiencin the joyful feelin of a boy escapin from school, bean to
talk to his driver.

The man told him that arms were bein distributed today at the Kremlin
and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hills
ates and a reat battle would be fouht there.

Havin reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs' house,
where he had not been for a lon time past. He went up to the ate.
erasim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzhok five
years before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer to his knock.

"At home?" asked Pierre.

"Owin to the present state of thins Sophia Danilovna has one to the
Torzhok estate with the children, your excellency."

"I will come in all the same, I have to look throuh the books," said
Pierre.

"Be so ood as to step in. Makar Alexeevich, the brother of my late
master--may the kindom of heaven be his--has remained here, but he is
in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.

Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insane
brother and a hard drinker.

"Yes, yes, I know. Let us o in..." said Pierre and entered the house.

A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearin a dressin own and
with aloshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seein Pierre
he muttered somethin anrily and went away alon the passae.

"He was a very clever man but has now rown quite feeble, as your honor
sees," said erasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierre nodded. "As
it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia Danilovna ave orders
that if anyone should come from you they were to have the books."

Pierre went into that loomy study which he had entered with such
trepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty and untouched
since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even loomier.

erasim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe. Pierre
went round the study, approached the cupboard in which the manuscripts
were kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,
the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic Scotch Acts with
Bazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down at the dusty writin
table, and, havin laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,
closed them, finally pushed them away, and restin his head on his hand
sank into meditation.

erasim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierre
always sittin in the same attitude.

More than two hours passed and erasim took the liberty of makin a
sliht noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did not
hear him.

"Is the cabman to be dischared, your honor?"

"Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousin himself and risin hurriedly. "Look
here," he added, takin erasim by a button of his coat and lookin down
at the old man with moist, shinin, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do you
know that there is oin to be a battle tomorrow?"

"We heard so," replied the man.

"I be you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you."

"Yes, your excellency," replied erasim. "Will you have somethin to
eat?"

"No, but I want somethin else. I want peasant clothes and a pistol,"
said Pierre, unexpectedly blushin.

"Yes, your excellency," said erasim after thinkin for a moment.

All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor's study,
and erasim heard him pacin restlessly from one corner to another and
talkin to himself. And he spent the niht on a bed made up for him
there.

erasim, bein a servant who in his time had seen many strane thins,
accepted Pierre's takin up his residence in the house without surprise,
and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That same evenin--
without even askin himself what they were wanted for--he procured a
coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to et him the pistol
next day. Makar Alexeevich came twice that evenin shufflin alon in
his aloshes as far as the door and stopped and looked inratiatinly at
Pierre. But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he wrapped his dressin
own around him with a shamefaced and anry look and hurried away. It
was when Pierre (wearin the coachman's coat which erasim had procured
for him and had disinfected by steam) was on his way with the old man to
buy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he met the Rostovs.




CHAPTER XIX

Kutuzov's order to retreat throuh Moscow to the Ryazan road was issued
at niht on the first of September.

The first troops started at once, and durin the niht they marched
slowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, those nearin
the town at the Doroomilov bride saw ahead of them masses of soldiers
crowdin and hurryin across the bride, ascendin on the opposite side
and blockin the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops were
bearin down on them from behind, and an unreasonin hurry and alarm
overcame them. They all rushed forward to the bride, onto it, and to
the fords and the boats. Kutuzov himself had driven round by side
streets to the other side of Moscow.

By ten o'clock in the mornin of the second of September, only the rear
uard remained in the Doroomilov suburb, where they had ample room. The
main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.

At that very time, at ten in the mornin of the second of September,
Napoleon was standin amon his troops on the Poklonny Hill lookin at
the panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of Auust to
the second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to the
entry of the French into Moscow, durin the whole of that aitatin,
memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather that
always comes as a surprise, when the sun hans low and ives more heat
than in sprin, when everythin shines so brihtly in the rare clear
atmosphere that the eyes smart, when the luns are strenthened and
refreshed by inhalin the aromatic autumn air, when even the nihts are
warm, and when in those dark warm nihts, olden stars startle and
deliht us continually by fallin from the sky.

At ten in the mornin of the second of September this weather still
held.

The brihtness of the mornin was maical. Moscow seen from the Poklonny
Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her ardens, and her
churches, and she seemed to be livin her usual life, her cupolas
litterin like stars in the sunliht.

The view of the strane city with its peculiar architecture, such as he
had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious and
uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that has
no knowlede of them. This city was evidently livin with the full force
of its own life. By the indefinite sins which, even at a distance,
distinuish a livin body from a dead one, Napoleon from the Poklonny
Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, the
breathin of that reat and beautiful body.

Every Russian lookin at Moscow feels her to be a mother; every
foreiner who sees her, even if inorant of her sinificance as the
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.

"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables elises, Moscou la sainte. La
voila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps," * said he, and
dismountin he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him, and
summoned Lelorne d'Ideville, the interpreter.


* "That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy Moscow! Here it
is then at last, that famous city. It was hih time."

"A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor,"
thouht he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). From that point of
view he azed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before. It seemed
strane to him that his lon-felt wish, which had seemed unattainable,
had at last been realized. In the clear mornin liht he azed now at
the city and now at the plan, considerin its details, and the assurance
of possessin it aitated and awed him.

"But could it be otherwise?" he thouht. "Here is this capital at my
feet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinkin? A strane,
beautiful, and majestic city; and a strane and majestic moment! In what
liht must I appear to them!" thouht he, thinkin of his troops. "Here
she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," he reflected,
lancin at those near him and at the troops who were approachin and
formin up. "One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancient
capital of the Tsars would perish. But my clemency is always ready to
descend upon the vanquished. I must be mananimous and truly reat. But
no, it can't be true that I am in Moscow," he suddenly thouht. "Yet
here she is lyin at my feet, with her olden domes and crosses
scintillatin and twinklin in the sunshine. But I shall spare her. On
the ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe reat
words of justice and mercy.... It is just this which Alexander will feel
most painfully, I know him." (It seemed to Napoleon that the chief
import of what was takin place lay in the personal strule between
himself and Alexander.) "From the heiht of the Kremlin--yes, there is
the Kremlin, yes--I will ive them just laws; I will teach them the
meanin of true civilization, I will make enerations of boyars remember
their conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not,
and do not, desire war, that I have waed war only aainst the false
policy of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in
Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people. I
do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored
monarch. 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desire
the peace and welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know their
presence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:
clearly, impressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am in
Moscow? Yes, there she lies."

"Qu'on m'amene les boyars," * said he to his suite.


* "Brin the boyars to me."

A eneral with a brilliant suite alloped off at once to fetch the
boyars.

Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was aain standin in the
same place on the Poklonny Hill awaitin the deputation. His speech to
the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imaination. That
speech was full of dinity and reatness as Napoleon understood it.

He was himself carried away by the tone of mananimity he intended to
adopt toward Moscow. In his imaination he appointed days for assemblies
at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own would
minle. He mentally appointed a overnor, one who would win the hearts
of the people. Havin learned that there were many charitable
institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors
on them all. He thouht that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose
and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians--and bein like
all Frenchmen unable to imaine anythin sentimental without a reference
to ma chere, ma tendre, ma pauvre mere * --he decided that he would
place an inscription on all these establishments in lare letters: "This
establishment is dedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should be
simply: Maison de ma Mere, *(2) he concluded. "But am I really in
Moscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from the
city so lon in appearin?" he wondered.


* "My dear, my tender, my poor mother."

* (2) "House of my Mother."

Meanwhile an aitated consultation was bein carried on in whispers
amon his enerals and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those sent to
fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,
that everyone had left it. The faces of those who were not conferrin
toether were pale and perturbed. They were not alarmed by the fact that
Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants (rave as that fact
seemed), but by the question how to tell the Emperor--without puttin
him in the terrible position of appearin ridiculous--that he had been
awaitin the boyars so lon in vain: that there were drunken mobs left
in Moscow but no one else. Some said that a deputation of some sort must
be scraped toether, others disputed that opinion and maintained that
the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then
told the truth.

"He will have to be told, all the same," said some entlemen of the
suite. "But, entlemen..."

The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditatin upon
his mananimous plans, was pacin patiently up and down before the
outspread map, occasionally lancin alon the road to Moscow from under
his lifted hand with a briht and proud smile.

"But it's impossible..." declared the entlemen of the suite, shruin
their shoulders but not venturin to utter the implied word--le
ridicule...

At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's instinct
suestin to him that the sublime moment havin been too lon drawn out
was beinnin to lose its sublimity, ave a sin with his hand. A sinle
report of a sinalin un followed, and the troops, who were already
spread out on different sides of Moscow, moved into the city throuh
Tver, Kalua, and Doroomilov ates. Faster and faster, vyin with one
another, they moved at the double or at a trot, vanishin amid the
clouds of dust they raised and makin the air rin with a deafenin roar
of minlin shouts.

Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as
the Doroomilov ate, but there aain stopped and, dismountin from his
horse, paced for a lon time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart, awaitin
the deputation.




CHAPTER XX

Meanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps a
fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.
It was empty in the sense that a dyin queenless hive is empty.

In a queenless hive no life is left thouh to a superficial lance it
seems as much alive as other hives.

The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday
sun as aily as around the livin hives; from a distance it smells of
honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way. But one
has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no loner any
life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the sound
that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeeper's tap on the
wall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous hummin
of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateninly
compressed, and producin by the rapid vibration of their wins an
aerial livin sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzin from
different parts of the deserted hive. From the alihtin board, instead
of the former spirituous frarant smell of honey and venom, and the warm
whiffs of crowded life, comes an odor of emptiness and decay minlin
with the smell of honey. There are no loner sentinels soundin the
alarm with their abdomens raised, and ready to die in defense of the
hive. There is no loner the measured quiet sound of throbbin activity,
like the sound of boilin water, but diverse discordant sounds of
disorder. In and out of the hive lon black robber bees smeared with
honey fly timidly and shiftily. They do not stin, but crawl away from
daner. Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and they
flew out empty; now they fly out laden. The beekeeper opens the lower
part of the hive and peers in. Instead of black, lossy bees--tamed by
toil, clinin to one another's les and drawin out the wax, with a
ceaseless hum of labor--that used to han in lon clusters down to the
floor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately in
various directions on the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of a
neatly lued floor, swept by the bees with the fannin of their wins,
there is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, dyin bees
scarcely movin their les, and dead ones that have not been cleared
away.

The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super.
Instead of serried rows of bees sealin up every ap in the combs and
keepin the brood warm, he sees the skillful complex structures of the
combs, but no loner in their former state of purity. All is nelected
and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowlin about
the combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if they
were old, creep slowly about without tryin to hinder the robbers,
havin lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps,
and butterflies knock awkwardly aainst the walls of the hive in their
fliht. Here and there amon the cells containin dead brood and honey
an anry buzzin can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of
bees, by force of habit and custom cleanin out the brood cells, with
efforts beyond their strenth laboriously dra away a dead bee or
bumblebee without knowin why they do it. In another corner two old bees
are lanuidly fihtin, or cleanin themselves, or feedin one another,
without themselves knowin whether they do it with friendly or hostile
intent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crushin one another, attack
some victim and fiht and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or
killed, drops from above slowly and lihtly as a feather, amon the heap
of corpses. The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine the
brood cells. In place of the former close dark circles formed by
thousands of bees sittin back to back and uardin the hih mystery of
eneration, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of
bees. They have almost all died unawares, sittin in the sanctuary they
had uarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only
a few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy's
hand, lackin the spirit to die stinin him; the rest are dead and fall
as lihtly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes the hive, chalks a mark
on it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.

So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, and
morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart,
awaitin what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance of
the proprieties--a deputation.

In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly
movin about, followin their old habits and hardly aware of what they
were doin.

When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was
empty, he looked anrily at his informant, turned away, and silently
continued to walk to and fro.

"My carriae!" he said.

He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the
suburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incredible
event!"

He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the Doroomilov
suburb.

The coup de theatre had not come off.




CHAPTER XXI

The Russian troops were passin throuh Moscow from two o'clock at niht
till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the
last of the inhabitants who were leavin.

The reatest crush durin the movement of the troops took place at the
Stone, Moskva, and Yauza brides.

While the troops, dividin into two parts when passin around the
Kremlin, were thronin the Moskva and the Stone brides, a reat many
soldiers, takin advantae of the stoppae and conestion, turned back
from the brides and slipped stealthily and silently past the church of
Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski ate, back up the hill to
the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily take
thins not belonin to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales
filled all the passaes and alleys of the Bazaar. But there were no
dealers with voices of inratiatin affability invitin customers to
enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of female
purchasers--but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats thouh without
muskets, enterin the Bazaar empty-handed and silently makin their way
out throuh its passaes with bundles. Tradesmen and their assistants
(of whom there were but few) moved about amon the soldiers quite
bewildered. They unlocked their shops and locked them up aain, and
themselves carried oods away with the help of their assistants. On the
square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beatin the muster call. But
the roll of the drums did not make the lootin soldiers run in the
direction of the drum as formerly, but made them, on the contrary, run
farther away. Amon the soldiers in the shops and passaes some men were
to be seen in ray coats, with closely shaven heads. Two officers, one
with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean, dark-ray horse,
the other in an overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyinka
Street, talkin. A third officer alloped up to them.

"The eneral orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.
This is outraeous! Half the men have dispersed."

"Where are you off to?... Where?..." he shouted to three infantrymen
without muskets who, holdin up the skirts of their overcoats, were
slippin past him into the Bazaar passae. "Stop, you rascals!"

"But how are you oin to stop them?" replied another officer. "There is
no ettin them toether. The army should push on before the rest bolt,
that's all!"

"How can one push on? They are stuck there, weded on the bride, and
don't move. Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from
runnin away?"

"Come, o in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.

The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went with
him into the arcade. Some soldiers started runnin away in a roup. A
shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose, and a calm,
persistent, calculatin expression on his plump face, hurriedly and
ostentatiously approached the officer, swinin his arms.

"Your honor!" said he. "Be so ood as to protect us! We won't rude
trifles, you are welcome to anythin--we shall be delihted! Pray!...
I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable entleman, or
even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but what's all
this--sheer robbery! If you please, could not uards be placed if only
to let us close the shop...."

Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.

"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-lookin man. "When
one's head is one one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take what any of you
like!" And flourishin his arm eneretically he turned sideways to the
officer.

"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the first
tradesman anrily. "Please step inside, your honor!"

"Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my three shops here I have a
hundred thousand rubles' worth of oods. Can they be saved when the army
has one? Eh, what people! 'Aainst od's miht our hands can't fiht.'"

"Come inside, your honor!" repeated the tradesman, bowin.

The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.

"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one of
the passaes.

From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just as
the officer came up to it a man in a ray coat with a shaven head was
flun out violently.

This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer. The
officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at that
moment fearful screams reached them from the hue crowd on the Moskva
bride and the officer ran out into the square.

"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was already
allopin off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which the
screams came.

The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached the
bride he saw two unlimbered uns, the infantry crossin the bride,
several overturned carts, and frihtened and lauhin faces amon the
troops. Beside the cannon a cart was standin to which two horses were
harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressin close to the wheels.
The cart was loaded hih, and at the very top, beside a child's chair
with its les in the air, sat a peasant woman utterin piercin and
desperate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officers that the screams
of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that
eneral Ermolov, comin up to the crowd and learnin that soldiers were
dispersin amon the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bride,
had ordered two uns to be unlimbered and made a show of firin at the
bride. The crowd, crushin one another, upsettin carts, and shoutin
and squeezin desperately, had cleared off the bride and the troops
were now movin forward.




CHAPTER XXII

Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone in the
streets. The ates and shops were all closed, only here and there round
the taverns solitary shouts or drunken sons could be heard. Nobody
drove throuh the streets and footsteps were rarely heard. The
Povarskaya was quite still and deserted. The hue courtyard of the
Rostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dun from the
horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the reat drawin room
of the house, which had been left with all it contained, were two
people. They were the yard porter Inat, and the pae boy Mishka,
Vasilich's randson who had stayed in Moscow with his randfather.
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strummin on it with one
finer. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smilin with
satisfaction before the lare mirror.

"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Inat?" said the boy, suddenly beinnin to
strike the keyboard with both hands.

"Only fancy!" answered Inat, surprised at the broadenin rin on his
face in the mirror.

"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of Mavra
Kuzminichna who had entered silently. "How he's rinnin, the fat mu!
Is that what you're here for? Nothin's cleared away down there and
Vasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"

Inat left off smilin, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room with
meekly downcast eyes.

"Aunt, I did it ently," said the boy.

"I'll ive you somethin ently, you monkey you!" cried Mavra
Kuzminichna, raisin her arm threateninly. "o and et the samovar to
boil for your randfather."

Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it, and
with a deep sih left the drawin room and locked its main door.

oin out into the yard she paused to consider where she should o next-
-to drink tea in the servants' win with Vasilich, or into the storeroom
to put away what still lay about.

She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street. Someone
stopped at the ate, and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it.
Mavra Kuzminichna went to the ate.

"Who do you want?"

"The count--Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov."

"And who are you?"

"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant, well-bred
Russian voice.

Mavra Kuzminichna opened the ate and an officer of eihteen, with the
round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.

"They have one away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime," said
Mavra Kuzminichna cordially.

The youn officer standin in the ateway, as if hesitatin whether to
enter or not, clicked his tonue.

"Ah, how annoyin!" he muttered. "I should have come yesterday.... Ah,
what a pity."

Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympathetically
examinin the familiar Rostov features of the youn man's face, his
tattered coat and trodden-down boots.

"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.

"Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation and
placed his hand on the ate as if to leave.

He aain paused in indecision.

"You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kinsman of the count's and he has
been very kind to me. As you see" (he lanced with an amused air and
ood-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my thins are worn out and I
have no money, so I was oin to ask the count..."

Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.

"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.

And as soon as the officer let o of the ate handle she turned and,
hurryin away on her old les, went throuh the back yard to the
servants' quarters.

While Mavra Kuzminichna was runnin to her room the officer walked about
the yard azin at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faint
smile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice old
woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way to
overtake my reiment, which must by now be ettin near the Roozhski
ate?" thouht he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichna appeared from behind the
corner of the house with a frihtened yet resolute look, carryin a
rolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from the
officer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white twenty-
five-ruble assinat and hastily handed it to him.

"If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course...
but as it is..."

Mavra Kuzminichna rew abashed and confused. The officer did not
decline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.

"If the count had been at home..." Mavra Kuzminichna went on
apoloetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May od preserve you!" said
she, bowin as she saw him out.

Swayin his head and smilin as if amused at himself, the officer ran
almost at a trot throuh the deserted streets toward the Yauza bride to
overtake his reiment.

But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed ate for some time with moist
eyes, pensively swayin her head and feelin an unexpected flow of
motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown youn officer.




CHAPTER XXIII

From an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the round floor of which was
a dramshop, came drunken shouts and sons. On benches round the tables
in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspirin,
with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously sinin
some son or other. They were sinin discordantly, arduously, and with
reat effort, evidently not because they wished to sin, but because
they wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall, fair-
haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standin over the others. His face
with its fine straiht nose would have been handsome had it not been for
his thin, compressed, twitchin lips and dull, loomy, fixed eyes.
Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were sinin,
and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white arm with
the sleeve turned up to the elbow, tryin unnaturally to spread out his
dirty finers. The sleeve of his coat kept slippin down and he always
carefully rolled it up aain with his left hand, as if it were most
important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishin should be bare.
In the midst of the son cries were heard, and fihtin and blows in the
passae and porch. The tall lad waved his arm.

"Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "There's a fiht, lads!" And,
still rollin up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.

The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the leadership of
the tall lad were drinkin in the dramshop that mornin, had brouht the
publican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink served
them. The blacksmiths from a neihborin smithy, hearin the sounds of
revelry in the tavern and supposin it to have been broken into, wished
to force their way in too and a fiht in the porch had resulted.

The publican was fihtin one of the smiths at the door, and when the
workmen came out the smith, wrenchin himself free from the tavern
keeper, fell face downward on the pavement.

Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressin aainst the publican
with his chest.

The lad with the turned-up sleeve ave the smith a blow in the face and
cried wildly: "They're fihtin us, lads!"

At that moment the first smith ot up and, scratchin his bruised face
to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...
They've killed a man, lads!"

"Oh, racious me, a man beaten to death--killed!..." screamed a woman
comin out of a ate close by.

A crowd athered round the bloodstained smith.

"Haven't you robbed people enouh--takin their last shirts?" said a
voice addressin the publican. "What have you killed a man for, you
thief?"

The tall lad, standin in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from the
publican to the smith and back aain as if considerin whom he ouht to
fiht now.

"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!"

"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushin
away the men advancin on him, and snatchin his cap from his head he
flun it on the round.

As if this action had some mysterious and menacin sinificance, the
workmen surroundin the publican paused in indecision.

"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the captain of
police. You think I won't et to him? Robbery is not permitted to
anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, pickin up his cap.

"Come alon then! Come alon then!" the publican and the tall youn
fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the street
toether.

The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and others
followed behind, talkin and shoutin.

At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a lare house with closed
shutters and bearin a bootmaker's sinboard, stood a score of thin,
worn-out, loomy-faced bootmakers, wearin overalls and lon tattered
coats.

"He should pay folks off properly," a thin workinman, with frownin
brows and a straly beard, was sayin.

"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He's been
misleadin us all the week and now that he's brouht us to this pass
he's made off."

On seein the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceased
speakin, and with eaer curiosity all the bootmakers joined the movin
crowd.

"Where are all the folks oin?"

"Why, to the police, of course!"

"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did you think?
Look what folks are sayin."

Questions and answers were heard. The publican, takin advantae of the
increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.

The tall youth, not noticin the disappearance of his foe, waved his
bare arm and went on talkin incessantly, attractin eneral attention
to himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded, expectin
answers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds.

"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the overnment is there
for. Am I not riht, ood Christians?" said the tall youth, with a
scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no overnment! How can
one do without overnment? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob us."

"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd. "Will they ive up
Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed it!
Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That's
what the overnment is for. You'd better listen to what people are
sayin," said some of the mob pointin to the tall youth.

By the wall of China-Town a smaller roup of people were athered round
a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand.

"An ukase, they are readin an ukase! Readin an ukase!" cried voices in
the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.

The man in the frieze coat was readin the broadsheet of Auust 31. When
the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand of
the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he bean in a rather
tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beinnin.

"Early tomorrow I shall o to his Serene Hihness," he read ("Sirin
Hihness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips and
a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid the army
to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..." the reader
went on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youth victoriously,
"he's oin to clear up the whole affair for you...."), "in destroyin
them, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back to
dinner, and we'll set to work. We will do, completely do, and undo these
scoundrels."

The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The tall
lad hun his head loomily. It was evident that no one had understood
the last part. In particular, the words "I will come back to dinner,"
evidently displeased both reader and audience. The people's minds were
tuned to a hih pitch and this was too simple and needlessly
comprehensible--it was what any one of them miht have said and
therefore was what an ukase emanatin from the hihest authority should
not say.

They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his lips and
swayed from side to side.

"We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask him indeed!...
Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of the crowd were suddenly
heard sayin, and the eneral attention turned to the police
superintendent's trap which drove into the square attended by two
mounted draoons.

The superintendent of police, who had one that mornin by Count
Rostopchin's orders to burn the bares and had in connection with that
matter acquired a lare sum of money which was at that moment in his
pocket, on seein a crowd bearin down upon him told his coachman to
stop.

"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were movin sinly
and timidly in the direction of his trap.

"What people are these?" he shouted aain, receivin no answer.

"Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor, in
accord with the proclamation of his hihest excellency the count, they
desire to serve, not sparin their lives, and it is not any kind of
riot, but as his hihest excellence said..."

"The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issued
concernin you," said the superintendent of police. "o on!" he ordered
his coachman.

The crowd halted, pressin around those who had heard what the
superintendent had said, and lookin at the departin trap.

The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scared
look, said somethin to his coachman, and his horses increased their
speed.

"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tall
youth. "Don't let him o, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!" shouted
different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap.

Followin the superintendent of police and talkin loudly the crowd went
in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.

"There now, the entry and merchants have one away and left us to
perish. Do they think we're dos?" voices in the crowd were heard sayin
more and more frequently.




CHAPTER XXIV

On the evenin of the first of September, after his interview with
Kutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offended
because he had not been invited to attend the council of war, and
because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in the
defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him at
the camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capital and its
patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant and
unimportant matters. Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this,
Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After supper he lay down on a sofa
without undressin, and was awakened soon after midniht by a courier
brinin him a letter from Kutuzov. This letter requested the count to
send police officers to uide the troops throuh the town, as the army
was retreatin to the Ryazan road beyond Moscow. This was not news to
Rostopchin. He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely since
his interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but
ever since the battle of Borodino, for all the enerals who came to
Moscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible to
fiht another battle, and since then the overnment property had been
removed every niht, and half the inhabitants had left the city with
Rostopchin's own permission. Yet all the same this information
astonished and irritated the count, comin as it did in the form of a
simple note with an order from Kutuzov, and received at niht, breakin
in on his beauty sleep.

When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions at
this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two important
considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite the
departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts this twofold aim all
Rostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Why were the holy relics,
the arms, ammunition, unpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Why
were thousands of inhabitants deceived into believin that Moscow would
not be iven up--and thereby ruined?" "To preserve the tranquillity of
the city," explains Count Rostopchin. "Why were bundles of useless
papers from the overnment offices, and Leppich's balloon and other
articles removed?" "To leave the town empty," explains Count Rostopchin.
One need only admit that public tranquillity is in daner and any action
finds a justification.

All the horrors of the rein of terror were based only on solicitude for
public tranquillity.

On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity of
Moscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assumin any probability
of an uprisin in the city? The inhabitants were leavin it and the
retreatin troops were fillin it. Why should that cause the masses to
riot?

Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anythin resemblin an
insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than ten
thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second of
September, and except for a mob in the overnor's courtyard, assembled
there at his biddin, nothin happened. It is obvious that there would
have been even less reason to expect a disturbance amon the people if
after the battle of Borodino, when the surrender of Moscow became
certain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of excitin the people
by distributin arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all the
holy relics, the unpowder, munitions, and money, and had told the
population plainly that the town would be abandoned.

Rostopchin, thouh he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanuine and
impulsive man who had always moved in the hihest administrative circles
and had no understandin at all of the people he supposed himself to be
uidin. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he had in
imaination been playin the role of director of the popular feelin of
"the heart of Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as to all
administrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow's
inhabitants, but he also thouht he controlled their mental attitude by
means of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which the
people despise in their own class and do not understand from those in
authority. Rostopchin was so pleased with the fine role of leader of
popular feelin, and had rown so used to it, that the necessity of
relinquishin that role and abandonin Moscow without any heroic display
took him unawares and he suddenly felt the round slip away from under
his feet, so that he positively did not know what to do. Thouh he knew
it was comin, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believe
that Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. The
inhabitants left aainst his wishes. If the overnment offices were
removed, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the count
yielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the role he had created for
himself. As is often the case with those ifted with an ardent
imaination, thouh he had lon known that Moscow would be abandoned he
knew it only with his intellect, he did not believe it in his heart and
did not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs.

All his painstakin and eneretic activity (in how far it was useful and
had any effect on the people is another question) had been simply
directed toward arousin in the masses his own feelin of patriotic
hatred of the French.

But when events assumed their true historical character, when expressin
hatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when it was not even
possible to express that hatred by fihtin a battle, when self-
confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question before
Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man,
abandonin their belonins and provin by that neative action all the
depth of their national feelin, then the role chosen by Rostopchin
suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,
weak, and alone, with no round to stand on.

When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory note
from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself to
blame. All that he had been specially put in chare of, the state
property which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and it was no
loner possible to take the whole of it away.

"Who is to blame for it? Who has let thins come to such a pass?" he
ruminated. "Not I, of course. I had everythin ready. I had Moscow
firmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!
Traitors!" he thouht, without clearly definin who the villains and
traitors were, but feelin it necessary to hate those traitors whoever
they miht be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position in
which he found himself.

All that niht Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came to
him from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen the count
so morose and irritable.

"Your excellency, the Director of the Reistrar's Department has sent
for instructions... From the Consistory, from the Senate, from the
University, from the Foundlin Hospital, the Suffraan has sent...
askin for information.... What are your orders about the Fire Briade?
From the overnor of the prison... from the superintendent of the
lunatic asylum..." All niht lon such announcements were continually
bein received by the count.

To all these inquiries he ave brief and anry replies indicatin that
orders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair, carefully
prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that that somebody
would have to bear the whole responsibility for all that miht happen.

"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from the
Reistrar's Department, "that he should remain to uard his documents.
Now why are you askin silly questions about the Fire Briade? They have
horses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to the French."

"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:
what are your commands?"

"My commands? Let them o away, that's all.... And let the lunatics out
into the town. When lunatics command our armies od evidently means
these other madmen to be free."

In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count
Rostopchin shouted anrily at the overnor:

"Do you expect me to ive you two battalions--which we have not ot--for
a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"

"Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,
Vereshchain..."

"Vereshchain! Hasn't he been haned yet?" shouted Rostopchin. "Brin
him to me!"




CHAPTER XXV

Toward nine o'clock in the mornin, when the troops were already movin
throuh Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.
Those who were able to et away were oin of their own accord, those
who remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.

The count ordered his carriae that he miht drive to Sokolniki, and sat
in his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.

In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it is
only by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is kept
oin, and in this consciousness of bein indispensable every
administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts. While the
sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,
holdin on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himself
movin, naturally imaines that his efforts move the ship he is holdin
on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea beins to heave and the
ship to move, such a delusion is no loner possible. The ship moves
independently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no loner
reaches the movin vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead of
appearin a ruler and a source of power, becomes an insinificant,
useless, feeble man.

Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.

The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to see
him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that the
horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent of
police, after reportin that he had executed the instructions he had
received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in the
courtyard and wished to see him.

Without sayin a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his liht,
luxurious drawin room, went to the balcony door, took hold of the
handle, let it o aain, and went to the window from which he had a
better view of the whole crowd. The tall lad was standin in front,
flourishin his arm and sayin somethin with a stern look. The blood-
stained smith stood beside him with a loomy face. A drone of voices was
audible throuh the closed window.

"Is my carriae ready?" asked Rostopchin, steppin back from the window.

"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.

Rostopchin went aain to the balcony door.

"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.

"Your excellency, they say they have ot ready, accordin to your
orders, to o aainst the French, and they shouted somethin about
treachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency--I hardly
manaed to et away from it. Your excellency, I venture to suest..."

"You may o. I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimed
Rostopchin anrily.

He stood by the balcony door lookin at the crowd.

"This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have done
with me!" thouht he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled up
within him aainst the someone to whom what was happenin miht be
attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered by
aner but was still seekin an object on which to vent it. "Here is that
mob, the dres of the people," he thouht as he azed at the crowd:
"this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want a victim," he
thouht as he looked at the tall lad flourishin his arm. And this
thouht occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim,
somethin on which to vent his rae.

"Is the carriae ready?" he asked aain.

"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchain? He is
waitin at the porch," said the adjutant.

"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected recollection.

And rapidly openin the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.
The talkin instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and all eyes
were raised to the count.

"ood mornin, lads!" said the count briskly and loudly. "Thank you for
comin. I'll come out to you in a moment, but we must first settle with
the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin of
Moscow. Wait for me!"

And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the door
behind him.

A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran throuh the crowd. "He'll
settle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said the French...
He'll show you what law is!" the mob were sayin as if reprovin one
another for their lack of confidence.

A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,
ave an order, and the draoons formed up in line. The crowd moved
eaerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchin, comin out there
with quick anry steps, looked hastily around as if seekin someone.

"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a youn man comin
round the corner of the house between two draoons. He had a lon thin
neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was aain covered by
short hair. This youn man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coat
lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convict
trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, trodden-down boots. On
his thin, weak les were heavy chains which hampered his irresolute
movements.

"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turnin away his eyes from the youn
man in the fur-lined coat and pointin to the bottom step of the porch.
"Put him there."

The youn man in his clatterin chains stepped clumsily to the spot
indicated, holdin away with one finer the coat collar which chafed his
neck, turned his lon neck twice this way and that, sihed, and
submissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.

For several seconds while the youn man was takin his place on the step
the silence continued. Only amon the back rows of the people, who were
all pressin toward the one spot, could sihs, roans, and the shufflin
of feet be heard.

While waitin for the youn man to take his place on the step Rostopchin
stood frownin and rubbin his face with his hand.

"Lads!" said he, with a metallic rin in his voice. "This man,
Vereshchain, is the scoundrel by whose doin Moscow is perishin."

The youn man in the fur-lined coat, stoopin a little, stood in a
submissive attitude, his finers clasped before him. His emaciated youn
face, disfiured by the half-shaven head, hun down hopelessly. At the
count's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as if
wishin to say somethin or at least to meet his eye. But Rostopchin did
not look at him. A vein in the youn man's lon thin neck swelled like a
cord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.

All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered more
hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled sadly
and timidly, and lowerin his head shifted his feet on the step.

"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he has one over to
Bonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disraced the Russian name,
he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice,
but suddenly he lanced down at Vereshchain who continued to stand in
the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the siht, he raised his
arm and addressed the people, almost shoutin:

"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."

The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to one
another. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stiflin
atmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await somethin unknown,
uncomprehended, and terrible, was becomin unbearable. Those standin in
front, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, all
stood with wide-open eyes and mouths, strainin with all their strenth,
and held back the crowd that was pushin behind them.

"Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disrace the Russian name!"
shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."

Hearin not so much the words as the anry tone of Rostopchin's voice,
the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but aain paused.

"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchain in the
midst of the momentary silence that ensued, "Count! One od is above us
both...." He lifted his head and aain the thick vein in his thin neck
filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face.

He did not finish what he wished to say.

"Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly rowin
pale like Vereshchain.

"Draw sabers!" cried the draoon officer, drawin his own.

Another still stroner wave flowed throuh the crowd and reachin the
front ranks carried it swayin to the very steps of the porch. The tall
youth, with a stony look on his face, and riid and uplifted arm, stood
beside Vereshchain.

"Saber him!" the draoon officer almost whispered.

And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,
struck Vereshchain on the head with the blunt side of his saber.

"Ah!" cried Vereshchain in meek surprise, lookin round with a
frihtened lance as if not understandin why this was done to him. A
similar moan of surprise and horror ran throuh the crowd. "O Lord!"
exclaimed a sorrowful voice.

But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from Vereshchain
he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. The barrier
of human feelin, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd in
check suddenly broke. The crime had beun and must now be completed. The
plaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatenin and anry roar
of the crowd. Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship, that
last irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks,
carryin them off their feet and enulfin them all. The draoon was
about to repeat his blow. Vereshchain with a cry of horror, coverin
his head with his hands, rushed toward the crowd. The tall youth,
aainst whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,
yellin wildly, fell with him under the feet of the pressin, strulin
crowd.

Some beat and tore at Vereshchain, others at the tall youth. And the
screams of those that were bein trampled on and of those who tried to
rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd. It was a lon
time before the draoons could extricate the bleedin youth, beaten
almost to death. And for a lon time, despite the feverish haste with
which the mob tried to end the work that had been beun, those who were
hittin, throttlin, and tearin at Vereshchain were unable to kill
him, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swayin as one mass with them
in the center and renderin it impossible for them either to kill him or
let him o.

"Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold Christ....
Still alive... tenacious... serves him riht! Torture serves a thief
riht. Use the hatchet!... What--still alive?"

Only when the victim ceased to strule and his cries chaned to a lon-
drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,
bleedin corpse bein rapidly to chane places. Each one came up,
lanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, and
astonishment pushed back aain.

"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?" voices
in the crowd could be heard sayin. "Quite a youn fellow too... must
have been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he's not the riht
one.... How not the riht one?... O Lord! And there's another has been
beaten too--they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, the people... Aren't
they afraid of sinnin?..." said the same mob now, lookin with pained
distress at the dead body with its lon, thin, half-severed neck and its
livid face stained with blood and dust.

A painstakin police officer, considerin the presence of a corpse in
his excellency's courtyard unseemly, told the draoons to take it away.
Two draoons took it by its distorted les and draed it alon the
round. The ory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with its lon neck
trailed twistin alon the round. The crowd shrank back from it.

At the moment when Vereshchain fell and the crowd closed in with savae
yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and, instead
of oin to the back entrance where his carriae awaited him, went with
hurried steps and bent head, not knowin where and why, alon the
passae leadin to the rooms on the round floor. The count's face was
white and he could not control the feverish twitchin of his lower jaw.

"This way, your excellency... Where are you oin?... This way,
please..." said a tremblin, frihtened voice behind him.

Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turnin obediently, went in
the direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his caleche. The
distant roar of the yellin crowd was audible even there. He hastily
took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house in
Sokolniki.

When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no loner hear the
shouts of the mob, the count bean to repent. He remembered with
dissatisfaction the aitation and fear he had betrayed before his
subordinates. "The mob is terrible--disustin," he said to himself in
French. "They are like wolves whom nothin but flesh can appease."
"Count! One od is above us both!"--Vereshchain's words suddenly
recurred to him, and a disareeable shiver ran down his back. But this
was only a momentary feelin and Count Rostopchin smiled disdainfully at
himself. "I had other duties," thouht he. "The people had to be
appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishin for the
public ood"--and he bean thinkin of his social duties to his family
and to the city entrusted to him, and of himself--not himself as
Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodore Vasilyevich
Rostopchin was sacrificin himself for the public ood) but himself as
overnor, the representative of authority and of the Tsar. "Had I been
simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quite
different, but it was my duty to safeuard my life and dinity as
commander-in-chief."

Lihtly swayin on the flexible sprins of his carriae and no loner
hearin the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin rew physically
calm and, as always happens, as soon as he became physically tranquil
his mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. The
thouht which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one. Since the
world bean and men have killed one another no one has ever committed
such a crime aainst his fellow man without comfortin himself with this
same idea. This idea is le bien public, the hypothetical welfare of
other people.

To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he who
commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. And
Rostopchin now knew it.

Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but he
even found cause for self-satisfaction in havin so successfully
contrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish a
criminal and at the same time pacify the mob.

"Vereshchain was tried and condemned to death," thouht Rostopchin
(thouh the Senate had only condemned Vereshchain to hard labor), "he
was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him o unpunished and so I have
killed two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I ave them a victim
and at the same time punished a miscreant."

Havin reached his country house and beun to ive orders about domestic
arranements, the count rew quite tranquil.

Half an hour later he was drivin with his fast horses across the
Sokolniki field, no loner thinkin of what had occurred but considerin
what was to come. He was drivin to the Yauza bride where he had heard
that Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparin the anry and
stinin reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception. He
would make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for all
the calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and the
ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin rearded it) would fall upon his dotin
old head. Plannin beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin
turned anrily in his caleche and azed sternly from side to side.

The Sokolniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front of the
almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in white and
others like them walkin sinly across the field shoutin and
esticulatin.

One of these was runnin to cross the path of Count Rostopchin's
carriae, and the count himself, his coachman, and his draoons looked
with vaue horror and curiosity at these released lunatics and
especially at the one runnin toward them.

Swayin from side to side on his lon, thin les in his flutterin
dressin own, this lunatic was runnin impetuously, his aze fixed on
Rostopchin, shoutin somethin in a hoarse voice and makin sins to him
to stop. The lunatic's solemn, loomy face was thin and yellow, with its
beard rowin in uneven tufts. His black, aate pupils with saffron-
yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.

"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercin voice, and aain
shouted somethin breathlessly with emphatic intonations and estures.

Comin abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.

"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead. They
stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall rise.
They have torn my body. The kindom of od will be overthrown... Thrice
will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raisin his
voice hiher and hiher.

Count Rostopchin suddenly rew pale as he had done when the crowd closed
in on Vereshchain. He turned away. "o fas... faster!" he cried in a
tremblin voice to his coachman. The caleche flew over the round as
fast as the horses could draw it, but for a lon time Count Rostopchin
still heard the insane despairin screams rowin fainter in the
distance, while his eyes saw nothin but the astonished, frihtened,
bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the fur-lined coat.

Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that it had
cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clearly that
the ory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but that
the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever more
cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hear
the sound of his own words: "Cut him down! I command it...."

"Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them.... I
need not have said them," he thouht. "And then nothin would have
happened." He saw the frihtened and then infuriated face of the draoon
who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in the
fur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But I did not do it for my own
sake. I was bound to act that way.... The mob, the traitor... the public
welfare," thouht he.

Troops were still crowdin at the Yauza bride. It was hot. Kutuzov,
dejected and frownin, sat on a bench by the bride toyin with his whip
in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in a eneral's
uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said somethin in
French. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov that he had come
because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained.

"Thins would have been different if your Serene Hihness had not told
me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all this
would not have happened," he said.

Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not raspin what was said to him,
he was tryin to read somethin peculiar written at that moment on the
face of the man addressin him. Rostopchin rew confused and became
silent. Kutuzov slihtly shook his head and not takin his penetratin
aze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:

"No! I shall not ive up Moscow without a battle!"

Whether Kutuzov was thinkin of somethin entirely different when he
spoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowin them to be
meaninless, at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him.
And strane to say, the overnor of Moscow, the proud Count Rostopchin,
took up a Cossack whip and went to the bride where he bean with shouts
to drive on the carts that blocked the way.




CHAPTER XXVI

Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were enterin
Moscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttember hussars and behind
them rode the Kin of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.

About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of the Miraculous
Icon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the advanced
detachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel, le
Kremlin.

Around Murat athered a roup of those who had remained in Moscow. They
all stared in timid bewilderment at the strane, lon-haired commander
dressed up in feathers and old.

"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could be heard
sayin.

An interpreter rode up to the roup.

"Take off your cap... your caps!" These words went from one to another
in the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if it
was far to the Kremlin. The porter, listenin in perplexity to the
unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizin that the interpreter was
speakin Russian, did not understand what was bein said to him and
slipped behind the others.

Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russian
army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and several
voices at once bean answerin the interpreter. A French officer,
returnin from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reported
that the ates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there was
probably an ambuscade there.

"ood!" said Murat and, turnin to one of the entlemen in his suite,
ordered four liht uns to be moved forward to fire at the ates.

The uns emered at a trot from the column followin Murat and advanced
up the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka Street they
halted and drew in the Square. Several French officers superintended the
placin of the uns and looked at the Kremlin throuh field lasses.

The bells in the Kremlin were rinin for vespers, and this sound
troubled the French. They imained it to be a call to arms. A few
infantrymen ran to the Kutafyev ate. Beams and wooden screens had been
put there, and two musket shots ran out from under the ate as soon as
an officer and men bean to run toward it. A eneral who was standin by
the uns shouted some words of command to the officer, and the latter
ran back aain with his men.

The sound of three more shots came from the ate.

One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screens
came the strane sound of a few voices shoutin. Instantly as at a word
of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of the
French eneral, officers, and men chaned to one of determined
concentrated readiness for strife and sufferin. To all of them from the
marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,
Mokhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa ate (places familiar in
Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanuinary.
And all made ready for that battle. The cries from the ates ceased. The
uns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,
and an officer ave the word "Fire!" This was followed by two whistlin
sounds of canister shot, one after another. The shot rattled aainst the
stone of the ate and upon the wooden beams and screens, and two
waverin clouds of smoke rose over the Square.

A few instants after the echo of the reports resoundin over the stone-
built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strane sound above their
head. Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the air,
cawin and noisily flappin their wins. Toether with that sound came a
solitary human cry from the ateway and amid the smoke appeared the
fiure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat. He rasped a musket and
took aim at the French. "Fire!" repeated the officer once more, and the
reports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously.
The ate was aain hidden by smoke.

Nothin more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiers
and officers advanced to the ate. In the ateway lay three wounded and
four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,
toward the Znamenka.

"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointin to the beams and the
corpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatchin the wounded, threw
the corpses over the parapet.

Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all that was said
of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on that
they miht not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines to
their memory: "These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, havin
supplied themselves with uns from the arsenal, and fired" (the
wretches) "at the French. Some of them were sabered and the Kremlin was
pured of their presence."

Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered the
ates and bean pitchin their camp in the Senate Square. Out of the
windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Square
for fuel and kindled fires there.

Other detachments passed throuh the Kremlin and encamped alon the
Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quartered
themselves alon the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the Tverskoy
Streets. No masters of the houses bein found anywhere, the French were
not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it as
in a camp.

Thouh tattered, hunry, worn out, and reduced to a third of their
oriinal number, the French entered Moscow in ood marchin order. It
was a weary and famished, but still a fihtin and menacin army. But it
remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into their
different lodins. As soon as the men of the various reiments bean to
disperse amon the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lost
forever and there came into bein somethin nondescript, neither
citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. When five weeks
later these same men left Moscow, they no loner formed an army. They
were a mob of marauders, each carryin a quantity of articles which
seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man when he left
Moscow was no loner, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keep
what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrow
neck of a ju, and havin seized a handful of nuts will not open its
fist for fear of losin what it holds, and therefore perishes, the
French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because they
carried their loot with them, yet to abandon what they had stolen was as
impossible for them as it is for the monkey to open its paw and let o
of its nuts. Ten minutes after each reiment had entered a Moscow
district, not a soldier or officer was left. Men in military uniforms
and Hessian boots could be seen throuh the windows, lauhin and
walkin throuh the rooms. In cellars and storerooms similar men were
busy amon the provisions, and in the yards unlockin or breakin open
coach house and stable doors, lihtin fires in kitchens and kneadin
and bakin bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cookin; or frihtenin,
amusin, or caressin women and children. There were many such men both
in the shops and houses--but there was no army.

Order after order was issued by the French commanders that day
forbiddin the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbiddin any
violence to the inhabitants or any lootin, and announcin a roll call
for that very evenin. But despite all these measures the men, who had
till then constituted an army, flowed all over the wealthy, deserted
city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As a hunry herd of
cattle keeps well toether when crossin a barren field, but ets out of
hand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches rich
pastures, so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city.

No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers--like water
percolatin throuh sand--spread irresistibly throuh the city in all
directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched. The
cavalry, on enterin a merchant's house that had been abandoned and
findin there stablin more than sufficient for their horses, went on,
all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many of
them appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, and
quarreled and even fouht with other companies for them. Before they had
had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to see
the city and, hearin that everythin had been abandoned, rushed to
places where valuables were to be had for the takin. The officers
followed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doin
the same. In Carriae Row carriaes had been left in the shops, and
enerals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves.
The few inhabitants who had remained invited commandin officers to
their houses, hopin thereby to secure themselves from bein plundered.
There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it. All around
the quarters occupied by the French were other reions still unexplored
and unoccupied where, they thouht, yet reater riches miht be found.
And Moscow enulfed the army ever deeper and deeper. When water is
spilled on dry round both the dry round and the water disappear and
mud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into the
rich and deserted city resulted in fires and lootin and the destruction
of both the army and the wealthy city.

The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce de
Rostopchine, * the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,
however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burnin
of Moscow by makin any individual, or any roup of people, responsible
for it. Moscow was burned because it found itself in a position in which
any town built of wood was bound to burn, quite apart from whether it
had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire enines. Deserted
Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavins has to burn on
which sparks continually fall for several days. A town built of wood,
where scarcely a day passes without conflarations when the house owners
are in residence and a police force is present, cannot help burnin when
its inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke
pipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and
cook themselves meals twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to
billet troops in the villaes of any district and the number of fires in
that district immediately increases. How much then must the probability
of fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where forein troops
are quartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity
of the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire by
the soldiers' pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness of
enemy soldiers occupyin houses they did not own. Even if there was any
arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn the
houses--in any case a troublesome and danerous thin to do), arson
cannot be rearded as the cause, for the same thin would have happened
without any incendiarism.


* To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.

However temptin it miht be for the French to blame Rostopchin's
ferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later on
to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it is
impossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of the
fire, for Moscow had to burn as every villae, factory, or house must
burn which is left by its owners and in which straners are allowed to
live and cook their porride. Moscow was burned by its inhabitants, it
is true, but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remained
in it. Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact like
Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitants
abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, nor
brin them the keys of the city.




CHAPTER XXVII

The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiatin starwise as it did,
only reached the quarter where Pierre was stayin by the evenin of the
second of September.

After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,
Pierre was in a state borderin on insanity. He was completely obsessed
by one persistent thouht. He did not know how or when this thouht had
taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothin of the past,
understood nothin of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared to
him like a dream.

He had left home only to escape the intricate tanle of life's demands
that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable to
unravel. He had one to Joseph Alexeevich's house, on the plea of
sortin the deceased's books and papers, only in search of rest from
life's turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich was
connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thouhts, quite
contrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself bein
drawn. He souht a quiet refue, and in Joseph Alexeevich's study he
really found it. When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writin table
in the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and sinificant memories
of the last few days rose one after another in his imaination,
particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vaue sense of his
own insinificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,
and strenth of the class of men he mentally classed as they. When
erasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of takin
part in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected. And
with that object he had asked erasim to et him a peasant's coat and a
pistol, confidin to him his intentions of remainin in Joseph
Alexeevich's house and keepin his name secret. Then durin the first
day spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix his
attention on the masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea
that had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic sinificance of
his name in connection with Bonaparte's more than once vauely presented
itself. But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a
limit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies that
often passed throuh his mind and left no trace behind.

When, havin bouht the coat merely with the object of takin part amon
the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostovs and
Natasha had said to him: "Are you remainin in Moscow?... How splendid!"
the thouht flashed into his mind that it really would be a ood thin,
even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he was
predestined to do.

Next day, with the sole idea of not sparin himself and not lain in
any way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills ate. But when he
returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, he
suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibility
had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. He must remain in
Moscow, concealin his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, and
either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe--which it seemed
to him was solely due to Napoleon.

Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in 1809
by a erman student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.
And the risk to which he would expose his life by carryin out his
desin excited him still more.

Two equally stron feelins drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose.
The first was a feelin of the necessity of sacrifice and sufferin in
view of the common calamity, the same feelin that had caused him to o
to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick of
the battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, in
place of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep on
a hard sofa without undressin and eat the same food as erasim. The
other was that vaue and quite Russian feelin of contempt for
everythin conventional, artificial, and human--for everythin the
majority of men reard as the reatest ood in the world. Pierre had
first experienced this strane and fascinatin feelin at the Sloboda
Palace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life--all that
men so painstakinly acquire and uard--if it has any worth has so only
by reason of the joy with which it can all be renounced.

It was the feelin that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his last
penny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or lasses for no
apparent reason and knowin that it will cost him all the money he
possesses: the feelin which causes a man to perform actions which from
an ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as it were, his personal
power and strenth, affirmin the existence of a hiher, nonhuman
criterion of life.

From the very day Pierre had experienced this feelin for the first time
at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, but
only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierre
was supported in his desin and prevented from renouncin it by what he
had already done in that direction. If he were now to leave Moscow like
everyone else, his fliht from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, and
his announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would all
become not merely meaninless but contemptible and ridiculous, and to
this Pierre was very sensitive.

Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to his
mental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank durin
those days, the absence of wine and ciars, his dirty unchaned linen,
two almost sleepless nihts passed on a short sofa without beddin--all
this kept him in a state of excitement borderin on insanity.

It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The French had already entered
Moscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of actin he only thouht about
his undertakin, oin over its minutest details in his mind. In his
fancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the strikin of the
blow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness and
melancholy enjoyment imained his own destruction and heroic endurance.

"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" he thouht.
"Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistol or daer? But
that is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand of Providence that
punishes thee,' I shall say," thouht he, imainin what he would say
when killin Napoleon. "Well then, take me and execute me!" he went on,
speakin to himself and bowin his head with a sad but firm expression.

While Pierre, standin in the middle of the room, was talkin to himself
in this way, the study door opened and on the threshold appeared the
fiure of Makar Alexeevich, always so timid before but now quite
transformed.

His dressin own was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He was
obviously drunk. On seein Pierre he rew confused at first, but
noticin embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately rew bold and,
staerin on his thin les, advanced into the middle of the room.

"They're frihtened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. "I say I
won't surrender, I say... Am I not riht, sir?"

He paused and then suddenly seein the pistol on the table seized it
with unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor.

erasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stopped him
in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre, comin
out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazy
old man. Makar Alexeevich, frownin with exertion, held on to the pistol
and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head.

"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't et it," he yelled.

"That will do, please, that will do. Have the oodness--please, sir, to
let o! Please, sir..." pleaded erasim, tryin carefully to steer Makar
Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door.

"Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich.

"That's not riht, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow me to
have the pistol."

"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted Makar
Alexeevich, brandishin the pistol. "Board them!"

"Catch hold!" whispered erasim to the porter.

They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and draed him to the door.

The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a strule and of
a tipsy, hoarse voice.

Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercin feminine scream, reverberated from
the porch and the cook came runnin into the vestibule.

"It's them! racious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" she
cried.

erasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich o, and in the now silent
corridor the sound of several hands knockin at the front door could be
heard.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Pierre, havin decided that until he had carried out his desin he would
disclose neither his identity nor his knowlede of French, stood at the
half-open door of the corridor, intendin to conceal himself as soon as
the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre did not
retire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.

There were two of them. One was an officer--a tall, soldierly, handsome
man--the other evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, short, and
thin, with sunken cheeks and a dull expression. The officer walked in
front, leanin on a stick and slihtly limpin. When he had advanced a
few steps he stopped, havin apparently decided that these were ood
quarters, turned round to the soldiers standin at the entrance, and in
a loud voice of command ordered them to put up the horses. Havin done
that, the officer, liftin his elbow with a smart esture, stroked his
mustache and lihtly touched his hat.

"Bonjour, la companie!" * said he aily, smilin and lookin about him.


* "ood day, everybody!"

No one ave any reply.

"Vous etes le boureois?" * the officer asked erasim.


* "Are you the master here?"

erasim azed at the officer with an alarmed and inquirin look.

"Quartier, quartier, loement!" said the officer, lookin down at the
little man with a condescendin and ood-natured smile. "Les francais
sont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachons pas, mon
vieux!" * added he, clappin the scared and silent erasim on the
shoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in this establishment?" he
asked aain in French, lookin around and meetin Pierre's eyes. Pierre
moved away from the door.


* "Quarters, quarters, lodins! The French are ood fellows. What the
devil! There, don't let us be cross, old fellow!"

Aain the officer turned to erasim and asked him to show him the rooms
in the house.

"Master, not here--don't understand... me, you..." said erasim, tryin
to render his words more comprehensible by contortin them.

Still smilin, the French officer spread out his hands before erasim's
nose, intimatin that he did not understand him either, and moved,
limpin, to the door at which Pierre was standin. Pierre wished to o
away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar Alexeevich
appearin at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand. With a
madman's cunnin, Makar Alexeevich eyed the Frenchman, raised his
pistol, and took aim.

"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, tryin to press the trier. Hearin
the yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threw
himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up the
pistol Makar Alexeevich at last ot his finers on the trier, there
was a deafenin report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. The
Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.

Forettin his intention of concealin his knowlede of French, Pierre,
snatchin away the pistol and throwin it down, ran up to the officer
and addressed him in French.

"You are not wounded?" he asked.

"I think not," answered the Frenchman, feelin himself over. "But I have
had a lucky escape this time," he added, pointin to the damaed plaster
of the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, lookin sternly at Pierre.

"Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierre rapidly,
quite forettin the part he had intended to play. "He is an unfortunate
madman who did not know what he was doin."

The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.

Makar Alexeevich was standin with parted lips, swayin, as if about to
fall asleep, as he leaned aainst the wall.

"Briand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, lettin o of
him. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardon
traitors," he added, with a look of loomy dinity and a fine eneretic
esture.

Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold that
drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with the
same loomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile. For
a few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsome face assumed a
melodramatically entle expression and he held out his hand.

"You have saved my life. You are French," said he.

For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable. Only a Frenchman could
perform a reat deed, and to save his life--the life of M. Ramballe,
captain of the 13th Liht Reiment--was undoubtedly a very reat deed.

But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's conviction
based upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.

"I am Russian," he said quickly.

"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, wavin his
finer before his nose and smilin. "You shall tell me all about that
presently. I am delihted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we to
do with this man?" he added, addressin himself to Pierre as to a
brother.

Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, havin once received that loftiest
of human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer's look
and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre aain explained who Makar
Alexeevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecile
had seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover from
him, and beed the officer to let the deed o unpunished.

The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic esture with his
arm.

"You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I rant it
you. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and eneretically, and takin
the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for savin his
life, he went with him into the room.

The soldiers in the yard, hearin the shot, came into the passae askin
what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,
but the officer sternly checked them.

"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.

The soldiers went out aain, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had time
to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.

"Captain, there is soup and a le of mutton in the kitchen," said he.
"Shall I serve them up?"

"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.




CHAPTER XXIX

When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter aain
thouht it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to
o away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so very polite,
amiable, ood-natured, and enuinely rateful to Pierre for savin his
life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him in
the parlor--the first room they entered. To Pierre's assurances that he
was not a Frenchman, the captain, evidently not understandin how anyone
could decline so flatterin an appellation, shrued his shoulders and
said that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passin for a Russian let it
be so, but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by ratitude
for savin his life.

Had this man been endowed with the slihtest capacity for perceivin the
feelins of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre's feelins
were, the latter would probably have left him, but the man's animated
obtuseness to everythin other than himself disarmed Pierre.

"A Frenchman or a Russian prince inconito," said the officer, lookin
at Pierre's fine thouh dirty linen and at the rin on his finer. "I
owe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchman never
forets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. That
is all I can say."

There was so much ood nature and nobility (in the French sense of the
word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in his
estures, that Pierre, unconsciously smilin in response to the
Frenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him.

"Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Liht Reiment, Chevalier of the Leion
of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," he introduced
himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckerin his lips under
his mustache. "Will you now be so ood as to tell me with whom I have
the honor of conversin so pleasantly, instead of bein in the ambulance
with that maniac's bullet in my body?"

Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushin, bean
to try to invent a name and to say somethin about his reason for
concealin it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.

"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are an officer...
a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms aainst us. That's not
my business. I owe you my life. That is enouh for me. I am quite at
your service. You belon to the entry?" he concluded with a shade of
inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Your baptismal name, if you
please. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say.... That's all I
want to know."

When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodka
brouht, with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellar
and brouht with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, and
himself bean to eat reedily and quickly like a healthy and hunry man,
munchin his food rapidly with his stron teeth, continually smackin
his lips, and repeatin--"Excellent! Delicious!" His face rew red and
was covered with perspiration. Pierre was hunry and shared the dinner
with pleasure. Morel, the orderly, brouht some hot water in a saucepan
and placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brouht a bottle of kvass,
taken from the kitchen for them to try. That beverae was already known
to the French and had been iven a special name. They called it limonade
de cochon (pi's lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade de
cochon he had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they
had taken while passin throuh Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel and
applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up to
its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for
Pierre. The satisfaction of his huner and the wine rendered the captain
still more lively and he chatted incessantly all throuh dinner.

"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for savin
me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enouh in my body
already. Here is one I ot at Waram" (he touched his side) "and a
second at Smolensk"--he showed a scar on his cheek--"and this le which
as you see does not want to march, I ot that on the seventh at the
reat battle of la Moskowa. Sacre Dieu! It was splendid! That delue of
fire was worth seein. It was a touh job you set us there, my word! You
may be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the couh I cauht
there, I should be ready to bein aain. I pity those who did not see
it."

"I was there," said Pierre.

"Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes. The
reat redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman. "And
you made us pay dear for it. I was at it three times--sure as I sit
here. Three times we reached the uns and three times we were thrown
back like cardboard fiures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Your
renadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks six
times in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our Kin of
Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one of
us soldiers!" he added, smilin, after a momentary pause. "So much the
better, so much the better, Monsieur Pierre! Terrible in battle...
allant... with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's what the
French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"

The captain was so naively and ood-humoredly ay, so real, and so
pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily
at him. Probably the word "allant" turned the captain's thouhts to the
state of Moscow.

"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all left
Moscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"

"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it?"
asked Pierre.

"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanuine chuckle, pattin
Pierre on the shoulder. "What a thin to say!" he exclaimed. "Paris?...
But Paris, Paris..."

"Paris--the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark for him.

The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stoppin short in the
middle of his talk and azin intently with his lauhin, kindly eyes.

"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have waered
that you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..." and
havin uttered this compliment, he aain azed at him in silence.

"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre.

"Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn't know Paris
is a savae. You can tell a Parisian two leaues off. Paris is Talma, la
Duchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," and noticin that his
conclusion was weaker than what had one before, he added quickly:
"There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and have
remained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the less for it."

Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he had
spent alone with his depressin thouhts, Pierre involuntarily enjoyed
talkin with this cheerful and ood-natured man.

"To return to your ladies--I hear they are lovely. What a wretched idea
to o and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is in
Moscow. What a chance those irls have missed! Your peasants, now--
that's another thin; but you civilized people, you ouht to know us
better than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome, Warsaw,
all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we are loved. We are
nice to know. And then the Emperor..." he bean, but Pierre interrupted
him.

"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad and
embarrassed, "is the Emperor...?"

"The Emperor? He is enerosity, mercy, justice, order, enius--that's
what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I assure you
I was his enemy eiht years ao. My father was an emirant count.... But
that man has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. I could not resist
the siht of the randeur and lory with which he has covered France.
When I understood what he wanted--when I saw that he was preparin a bed
of laurels for us, you know, I said to myself: 'That is a monarch,' and
I devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the reatest
man of the aes past or future."

"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a uilty look.

The Frenchman looked at his uilty face and smiled.

"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued his
talk.

Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at the
ate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttember hussars had
come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain's
horses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars did
not understand what was said to them in French.

The captain had their senior sereant called in, and in a stern voice
asked him to what reiment he beloned, who was his commandin officer,
and by what riht he allowed himself to claim quarters that were already
occupied. The erman who knew little French, answered the two first
questions by ivin the names of his reiment and of his commandin
officer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understand
said, introducin broken French into his own erman, that he was the
quartermaster of the reiment and his commander had ordered him to
occupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, who knew erman,
translated what the erman said to the captain and ave the captain's
reply to the Wurttember hussar in erman. When he had understood what
was said to him, the erman submitted and took his men elsewhere. The
captain went out into the porch and ave some orders in a loud voice.

When he returned to the room Pierre was sittin in the same place as
before, with his head in his hands. His face expressed sufferin. He
really was sufferin at that moment. When the captain went out and he
was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position he
was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happy
conquerors were masters in it and were patronizin him. Painful as that
was it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment. He was
tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few lasses of
wine he had drunk and the conversation with this ood-natured man had
destroyed the mood of concentrated loom in which he had spent the last
few days and which was essential for the execution of his desin. The
pistol, daer, and peasant coat were ready. Napoleon was to enter the
town next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful and
worthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not do
it. He did not know why, but he felt a forebodin that he would not
carry out his intention. He struled aainst the confession of his
weakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his
former loomy frame of mind, concernin veneance, killin, and self-
sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first man he
met.

The captain returned to the room, limpin slihtly and whistlin a tune.

The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelled
him. The tune he was whistlin, his ait, and the esture with which he
twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "I will o away
immediately. I won't say another word to him," thouht Pierre. He
thouht this, but still sat in the same place. A strane feelin of
weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to et up and o away, but
could not do so.

The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up and
down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if he
were smilin to himself at some amusin thouht.

"The colonel of those Wurttemberers is delihtful," he suddenly said.
"He's a erman, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's a erman."
He sat down facin Pierre. "By the way, you know erman, then?"

Pierre looked at him in silence.

"What is the erman for 'shelter'?"

"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The erman for shelter is Unterkunft."

"How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully.

"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated.

"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds with
lauhin eyes. "These ermans are first-rate fools, don't you think so,
Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.

"Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?
Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called out
aily.

Morel brouht candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at Pierre
by the candleliht and was evidently struck by the troubled expression
on his companion's face. Ramballe, with enuine distress and sympathy in
his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.

"There now, we're sad," said he, touchin Pierre's hand. "Have I upset
you? No, really, have you anythin aainst me?" he asked Pierre.
"Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"

Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's eyes
whose expression of sympathy was pleasin to him.

"Honestly, without speakin of what I owe you, I feel friendship for
you. Can I do anythin for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and death.
I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, strikin his chest.

"Thank you," said Pierre.

The captain azed intently at him as he had done when he learned that
"shelter" was Unterkunft in erman, and his face suddenly brihtened.

"Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried aily, fillin
two lasses with wine.

Pierre took one of the lasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptied his too,
aain pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in a
pensive attitude.

"Yes, my dear friend," he bean, "such is fortune's caprice. Who would
have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of draoons in the
service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscow
with him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in the sad and
measured tones of a man who intends to tell a lon story, "that our name
is one of the most ancient in France."

And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierre
the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and all
about his relations and his financial and family affairs, "ma pauvre
mere" playin of course an important part in the story.

"But all that is only life's settin, the real thin is love--love! Am I
not riht, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, rowin animated. "Another lass?"

Pierre aain emptied his lass and poured himself out a third.

"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, lookin with listenin eyes at
Pierre, bean talkin of love and of his love affairs.

There were very many of these, as one could easily believe, lookin at
the officer's handsome, self-satisfied face, and notin the eaer
enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Thouh all Ramballe's love
stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen reard as the special
charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincere
conviction that he alone had experienced and known all the charm of love
and he described women so allurinly that Pierre listened to him with
curiosity.

It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was not
that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor was
it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced for
Natasha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one he
considered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love of
simpletons.") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consisted
principally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in a
combination of inconruities ivin the chief charm to the feelin.

Thus the captain touchinly recounted the story of his love for a
fascinatin marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charmin,
innocent child of seventeen, dauhter of the bewitchin marquise. The
conflict of mananimity between the mother and the dauhter, endin in
the mother's sacrificin herself and offerin her dauhter in marriae
to her lover, even now aitated the captain, thouh it was the memory of
a distant past. Then he recounted an episode in which the husband played
the part of the lover, and he--the lover--assumed the role of the
husband, as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of
ermany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat
sauerkraut and the youn irls are "too blonde."

Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain's
memory, and which he narrated with rapid estures and lowin face, was
of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in eneral, the savin of life
continually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Pole had
entrusted to him his enchantin wife (parisienne de coeur) while himself
enterin the French service. The captain was happy, the enchantin
Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted by mananimity, the
captain restored the wife to the husband, sayin as he did so: "I have
saved your life, and I save your honor!" Havin repeated these words the
captain wiped his eyes and ave himself a shake, as if drivin away the
weakness which assailed him at this touchin recollection.

Listenin to the captain's tales, Pierre--as often happens late in the
evenin and under the influence of wine--followed all that was told him,
understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personal
memories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his mind. While
listenin to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedly
rose to his mind, and oin over the pictures of that love in his
imaination he mentally compared them with Ramballe's tales. Listenin
to the story of the strule between love and duty, Pierre saw before
his eyes every minutest detail of his last meetin with the object of
his love at the Sukharev water tower. At the time of that meetin it had
not produced an effect upon him--he had not even once recalled it. But
now it seemed to him that that meetin had had in it somethin very
important and poetic.

"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have reconized you," he now seemed to
hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, her
smile, her travelin hood, and a stray lock of her hair... and there
seemed to him somethin pathetic and touchin in all this.

Havin finished his tale about the enchantin Polish lady, the captain
asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrifice
himself for love and a feelin of envy of the leitimate husband.

Challened by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need to
express the thouhts that filled his mind. He bean to explain that he
understood love for a women somewhat differently. He said that in all
his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she could
never be his.

"Tiens!" said the captain.

Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliest
years, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was too
youn, and because he had been an illeitimate son without a name.
Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think of
her because he loved her too well, placin her far above everythin in
the world, and especially therefore above himself.

When he had reached this point, Pierre asked the captain whether he
understood that.

The captain made a esture sinifyin that even if he did not understand
it he beed Pierre to continue.

"Platonic love, clouds..." he muttered.

Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or the
thouht that this man did not, and never would, know any of those who
played a part in his story, or whether it was all these thins toether,
somethin loosened Pierre's tonue. Speakin thickly and with a faraway
look in his shinin eyes, he told the whole story of his life: his
marriae, Natasha's love for his best friend, her betrayal of him, and
all his own simple relations with her. Ured on by Ramballe's questions
he also told what he had at first concealed--his own position and even
his name.

More than anythin else in Pierre's story the captain was impressed by
the fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, and that
he had abandoned everythin and not left the city, but remained there
concealin his name and station.

When it was late at niht they went out toether into the street. The
niht was warm and liht. To the left of the house on the Pokrovka a
fire lowed--the first of those that were beinnin in Moscow. To the
riht and hih up in the sky was the sickle of the wanin moon and
opposite to it hun that briht comet which was connected in Pierre's
heart with his love. At the ate stood erasim, the cook, and two
Frenchmen. Their lauhter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks in
two lanuaes could be heard. They were lookin at the low seen in the
town.

There was nothin terrible in the one small, distant fire in the immense
city.

azin at the hih starry sky, at the moon, at the comet, and at the
low from the fire, Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There now, how
ood it is, what more does one need?" thouht he. And suddenly
rememberin his intention he rew dizzy and felt so faint that he leaned
aainst the fence to save himself from fallin.

Without takin leave of his new friend, Pierre left the ate with
unsteady steps and returnin to his room lay down on the sofa and
immediately fell asleep.




CHAPTER XXX

The low of the first fire that bean on the second of September was
watched from the various roads by the fuitive Muscovites and by the
retreatin troops, with many different feelins.

The Rostov party spent the niht at Mytishchi, fourteen miles from
Moscow. They had started so late on the first of September, the road had
been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many thins had been
forotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided to
spend that niht at a place three miles out of Moscow. The next mornin
they woke late and were aain delayed so often that they only ot as far
as reat Mytishchi. At ten o'clock that evenin the Rostov family and
the wounded travelin with them were all distributed in the yards and
huts of that lare villae. The Rostovs' servants and coachmen and the
orderlies of the wounded officers, after attendin to their masters, had
supper, fed the horses, and came out into the porches.

In a neihborin hut lay Raevski's adjutant with a fractured wrist. The
awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and his
moanin sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn niht. He had
spent the first niht in the same yard as the Rostovs. The countess said
she had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moanin, and at
Mytishchi she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from the
wounded man.

In the darkness of the niht one of the servants noticed, above the hih
body of a coach standin before the porch, the small low of another
fire. One low had lon been visible and everybody knew that it was
Little Mytishchi burnin--set on fire by Mamonov's Cossacks.

"But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked an orderly.

All turned their attention to the low.

"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov's
Cossacks."

"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away."

"Look, it must be in Moscow!"

Two of the azers went round to the other side of the coach and sat down
on its steps.

"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, and this is
riht on the other side."

Several men joined the first two.

"See how it's flarin," said one. "That's a fire in Moscow: either in
the Sushchevski or the Roozhski quarter."

No one replied to this remark and for some time they all azed silently
at the spreadin flames of the second fire in the distance.

Old Daniel Terentich, the count's valet (as he was called), came up to
the roup and shouted at Mishka.

"What are you starin at, you ood-for-nothin?... The count will be
callin and there's nobody there; o and ather the clothes toether."

"I only ran out to et some water," said Mishka.

"But what do you think, Daniel Terentich? Doesn't it look as if that
low were in Moscow?" remarked one of the footmen.

Daniel Terentich made no reply, and aain for a lon time they were all
silent. The low spread, risin and fallin, farther and farther still.

"od have mercy.... It's windy and dry..." said another voice.

"Just look! See what it's doin now. O Lord! You can even see the crows
flyin. Lord have mercy on us sinners!"

"They'll put it out, no fear!"

"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto been silent,
was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscow it is,
brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the white..." his voice faltered,
and he ave way to an old man's sob.

And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize the
sinificance for them of the low they were watchin. Sihs were heard,
words of prayer, and the sobbin of the count's old valet.




CHAPTER XXXI

The valet, returnin to the cottae, informed the count that Moscow was
burnin. The count donned his dressin own and went out to look. Sonya
and Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went out with him. Only
Natasha and the countess remained in the room. Petya was no loner with
the family, he had one on with his reiment which was makin for
Troitsa.

The countess, on hearin that Moscow was on fire, bean to cry. Natasha,
pale, with a fixed look, was sittin on the bench under the icons just
where she had sat down on arrivin and paid no attention to her father's
words. She was listenin to the ceaseless moanin of the adjutant, three
houses off.

"Oh, how terrible," said Sonya returnin from the yard chilled and
frihtened. "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awful
low! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said to her
cousin, evidently wishin to distract her mind.

But Natasha looked at her as if not understandin what was said to her
and aain fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had been in
this condition of stupor since the mornin, when Sonya, to the surprise
and annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountable reason found
it necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew's wound and of his bein
with their party. The countess had seldom been so anry with anyone as
she was with Sonya. Sonya had cried and beed to be foriven and now,
as if tryin to atone for her fault, paid unceasin attention to her
cousin.

"Look, Natasha, how dreadfully it is burnin!" said she.

"What's burnin?" asked Natasha. "Oh, yes, Moscow."

And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to et rid of her, she turned
her face to the window, looked out in such a way that it was evident
that she could not see anythin, and aain settled down in her former
attitude.

"But you didn't see it!"

"Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be left
in peace.

Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neither Moscow
nor the burnin of Moscow nor anythin else could seem of importance to
Natasha.

The count returned and lay down behind the partition. The countess went
up to her dauhter and touched her head with the back of her hand as she
was wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched her forehead with her
lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her.

"You are cold. You are tremblin all over. You'd better lie down," said
the countess.

"Lie down? All riht, I will. I'll lie down at once," said Natasha.

When Natasha had been told that mornin that Prince Andrew was seriously
wounded and was travelin with their party, she had at first asked many
questions: Where was he oin? How was he wounded? Was it serious? And
could she see him? But after she had been told that she could not see
him, that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in daner,
she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, evidently disbelievin
what they told her, and convinced that say what she miht she would
still be told the same. All the way she had sat motionless in a corner
of the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which the
countess knew so well and feared so much, and now she sat in the same
way on the bench where she had seated herself on arrivin. She was
plannin somethin and either decidin or had already decided somethin
in her mind. The countess knew this, but what it miht be she did not
know, and this alarmed and tormented her.

"Natasha, undress, darlin; lie down on my bed."

A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madame Schoss
and the two irls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.

"No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor," Natasha replied
irritably and she went to the window and opened it. Throuh the open
window the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. She put
her head out into the damp niht air, and the countess saw her slim neck
shakin with sobs and throbbin aainst the window frame. Natasha knew
it was not Prince Andrew who was moanin. She knew Prince Andrew was in
the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passae;
but this dreadful incessant moanin made her sob. The countess exchaned
a look with Sonya.

"Lie down, darlin; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softly
touchin Natasha's shoulders. "Come, lie down."

"Oh, yes... I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and bean hurriedly
undressin, tuin at the tapes of her petticoat.

When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressin jacket, she sat
down with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on the
floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front, and
bean replaitin it. Her lon, thin, practiced finers rapidly
unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head moved from side to
side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly before
her. When her toilet for the niht was finished she sank ently onto the
sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door.

"Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya.

"I'll stay here," muttered Natasha. "Do lie down," she added crossly,
and buried her face in the pillow.

The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down.
The small lamp in front of the icons was the only liht left in the
room. But in the yard there was a liht from the fire at Little
Mytishchi a mile and a half away, and throuh the niht came the noise
of people shoutin at a tavern Mamonov's Cossacks had set up across the
street, and the adjutant's unceasin moans could still be heard.

For a lon time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reached
her from inside and outside the room and did not move. First she heard
her mother prayin and sihin and the creakin of her bed under her,
then Madame Schoss' familiar whistlin snore and Sonya's entle
breathin. Then the countess called to Natasha. Natasha did not answer.

"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.

After a short silence the countess spoke aain but this time no one
replied.

Soon after that Natasha heard her mother's even breathin. Natasha did
not move, thouh her little bare foot, thrust out from under the quilt,
was rowin cold on the bare floor.

As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in a
crack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied near by.
The shoutin in the tavern had died down; only the moanin of the
adjutant was heard. Natasha sat up.

"Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.

No one replied. Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, and
stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, supple,
bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Steppin cautiously from one
foot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door and
rasped the cold door handle.

It seemed to her that somethin heavy was beatin rhythmically aainst
all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinkin with alarm and
terror and overflowin with love.

She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold,
damp earthen floor of the passae. The cold she felt refreshed her. With
her bare feet she touched a sleepin man, stepped over him, and opened
the door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was dark
in there. In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on which
somethin was lyin, stood a tallow candle with a lon, thick, and
smolderin wick.

From the moment she had been told that mornin of Prince Andrew's wound
and his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him. She did not
know why she had to, she knew the meetin would be painful, but felt the
more convinced that it was necessary.

All day she had lived only in hope of seein him that niht. But now
that the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she miht
see. How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like that incessant
moanin of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altoether like that. In her
imaination he was that terrible moanin personified. When she saw an
indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under the
quilt for his shoulders, she imained a horrible body there, and stood
still in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her forward. She
cautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in the
middle of a small room containin baae. Another man--Timokhin--was
lyin in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others--the
doctor and a valet--lay on the floor.

The valet sat up and whispered somethin. Timokhin, kept awake by the
pain in his wounded le, azed with wide-open eyes at this strane
apparition of a irl in a white chemise, dressin jacket, and nihtcap.
The valet's sleepy, frihtened exclamation, "What do you want? What's
the matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lyin in the
corner. Horribly unlike a man as that body looked, she must see him. She
passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she saw
Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as she
had always seen him.

He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, his
litterin eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,
delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,
ave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had never
seen on him before. She went up to him and with a swift, flexible,
youthful movement dropped on her knees.

He smiled and held out his hand to her.




CHAPTER XXXII

Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the ambulance
station on the field of Borodino. His feverish state and the
inflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor's
opinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate with
pleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that his
temperature was lower. He had reained consciousness that mornin. The
first niht after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he had
remained in the caleche, but at Mytishchi the wounded man himself asked
to be taken out and iven some tea. The pain caused by his removal into
the hut had made him roan aloud and aain lose consciousness. When he
had been placed on his camp bed he lay for a lon time motionless with
closed eyes. Then he opened them and whispered softly: "And the tea?"
His rememberin such a small detail of everyday life astonished the
doctor. He felt Prince Andrew's pulse, and to his surprise and
dissatisfaction found it had improved. He was dissatisfied because he
knew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so a
little later with reater sufferin. Timokhin, the red-nosed major of
Prince Andrew's reiment, had joined him in Moscow and was bein taken
alon with him, havin been wounded in the le at the battle of
Borodino. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, his
coachman, and two orderlies.

They ave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eaerly, lookin with
feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if tryin to understand and
remember somethin.

"I don't want any more. Is Timokhin here?" he asked.

Timokhin crept alon the bench to him.

"I am here, your excellency."

"How's your wound?"

"Mine, sir? All riht. But how about you?"

Prince Andrew aain pondered as if tryin to remember somethin.

"Couldn't one et a book?" he asked.

"What book?"

"The ospels. I haven't one."

The doctor promised to procure it for him and bean to ask how he was
feelin. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly but
reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he was
uncomfortable and in reat pain. The doctor and valet lifted the cloak
with which he was covered and, makin wry faces at the noisome smell of
mortifyin flesh that came from the wound, bean examinin that dreadful
place. The doctor was very much displeased about somethin and made a
chane in the dressins, turnin the wounded man over so that he roaned
aain and rew unconscious and delirious from the aony. He kept askin
them to et him the book and put it under him.

"What trouble would it be to you?" he said. "I have not ot one. Please
et it for me and put it under for a moment," he pleaded in a piteous
voice.

The doctor went into the passae to wash his hands.

"You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who was pourin
water over his hands. "For just one moment I didn't look after you...
It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it."

"By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thouht we had put somethin under him!"
said the valet.

The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was the
matter with him and remembered bein wounded and how was when he asked
to be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped at Mytishchi.
After rowin confused from pain while bein carried into the hut he
aain reained consciousness, and while drinkin tea once more recalled
all that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered the
moment at the ambulance station when, at the siht of the sufferins of
a man he disliked, those new thouhts had come to him which promised him
happiness. And those thouhts, thouh now vaue and indefinite, aain
possessed his soul. He remembered that he had now a new source of
happiness and that this happiness had somethin to do with the ospels.
That was why he asked for a copy of them. The uncomfortable position in
which they had put him and turned him over aain confused his thouhts,
and when he came to himself a third time it was in the complete
stillness of the niht. Everybody near him was sleepin. A cricket
chirped from across the passae; someone was shoutin and sinin in the
street; cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, and on the
walls, and a bi fly flopped at the head of the bed and around the
candle beside him, the wick of which was charred and had shaped itself
like a mushroom.

His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,
feels, and remembers innumerable thins simultaneously, but has the
power and will to select one sequence of thouhts or events on which to
fix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away from the
deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and can
then return aain to his own thouhts. But Prince Andrew's mind was not
in a normal state in that respect. All the powers of his mind were more
active and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. Most
diverse thouhts and imaes occupied him simultaneously. At times his
brain suddenly bean to work with a vior, clearness, and depth it had
never reached when he was in health, but suddenly in the midst of its
work it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strenth
to turn it back aain.

"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot be
deprived," he thouht as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,
azin fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. "A happiness
lyin beyond material forces, outside the material influences that act
on man--a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of lovin. Every
man can understand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it was possible
only for od. But how did od enjoin that law? And why was the Son...?"

And suddenly the sequence of these thouhts broke off, and Prince Andrew
heard (without knowin whether it was a delusion or reality) a soft
whisperin voice incessantly and rhythmically repeatin "piti-piti-
piti," and then "titi," and then aain "piti-piti-piti," and "ti-ti"
once more. At the same time he felt that above his face, above the very
middle of it, some strane airy structure was bein erected out of
slender needles or splinters, to the sound of this whispered music. He
felt that he had to balance carefully (thouh it was difficult) so that
this airy structure should not collapse; but nevertheless it kept
collapsin and aain slowly risin to the sound of whispered rhythmic
music--"it stretches, stretches, spreadin out and stretchin," said
Prince Andrew to himself. While listenin to this whisperin and feelin
the sensation of this drawin out and the construction of this edifice
of needles, he also saw by limpses a red halo round the candle, and
heard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzin of the fly that
flopped aainst his pillow and his face. Each time the fly touched his
face it ave him a burnin sensation and yet to his surprise it did not
destroy the structure, thouh it knocked aainst the very reion of his
face where it was risin. But besides this there was somethin else of
importance. It was somethin white by the door--the statue of a sphinx,
which also oppressed him.

"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thouht, "and that's my
les, and that is the door, but why is it always stretchin and drawin
itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti' and 'piti-piti-piti'...?
That's enouh, please leave off!" Prince Andrew painfully entreated
someone. And suddenly thouhts and feelins aain swam to the surface of
his mind with peculiar clearness and force.

"Yes--love," he thouht aain quite clearly. "But not love which loves
for somethin, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,
but the love which I--while dyin--first experienced when I saw my enemy
and yet loved him. I experienced that feelin of love which is the very
essence of the soul and does not require an object. Now aain I feel
that bliss. To love one's neihbors, to love one's enemies, to love
everythin, to love od in all His manifestations. It is possible to
love someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be loved
by divine love. That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that I
loved that man. What has become of him? Is he alive?...

"When lovin with human love one may pass from love to hatred, but
divine love cannot chane. No, neither death nor anythin else can
destroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many people have
I hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as I did
her." And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha, not as he had done in
the past with nothin but her charms which ave him deliht, but for the
first time picturin to himself her soul. And he understood her
feelins, her sufferins, shame, and remorse. He now understood for the
first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of his
rupture with her. "If only it were possible for me to see her once more!
Just once, lookin into those eyes to say..."

"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped the fly...
And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world of
reality and delirium in which somethin particular was happenin. In
that world some structure was still bein erected and did not fall,
somethin was still stretchin out, and the candle with its red halo was
still burnin, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; but
besides all this somethin creaked, there was a whiff of fresh air, and
a new white sphinx appeared, standin at the door. And that sphinx had
the pale face and shinin eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had just
been thinkin.

"Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is," thouht Prince Andrew,
tryin to drive that face from his imaination. But the face remained
before him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrew
wished to return to that former world of pure thouht, but he could not,
and delirium drew him back into its domain. The soft whisperin voice
continued its rhythmic murmur, somethin oppressed him and stretched
out, and the strane face was before him. Prince Andrew collected all
his strenth in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, and
suddenly there was a rinin in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, and
like a man pluned into water he lost consciousness. When he came to
himself, Natasha, that same livin Natasha whom of all people he most
loned to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed to
him, was kneelin before him. He realized that it was the real livin
Natasha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. Natasha, motionless
on her knees (she was unable to stir), with frihtened eyes riveted on
him, was restrainin her sobs. Her face was pale and riid. Only in the
lower part of it somethin quivered.

Prince Andrew sihed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.

"You?" he said. "How fortunate!"

With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on her
knees and, takin his hand carefully, bent her face over it and bean
kissin it, just touchin it lihtly with her lips.

"Forive me!" she whispered, raisin her head and lancin at him.
"Forive me!"

"I love you," said Prince Andrew.

"Forive...!"

"Forive what?" he asked.

"Forive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" faltered Natasha in a scarcely
audible, broken whisper, and bean kissin his hand more rapidly, just
touchin it with her lips.

"I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, liftin her
face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.

Those eyes, filled with happy tears, azed at him timidly,
compassionately, and with joyous love. Natasha's thin pale face, with
its swollen lips, was more than plain--it was dreadful. But Prince
Andrew did not see that, he saw her shinin eyes which were beautiful.
They heard the sound of voices behind them.

Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.
Timokhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his le, had
lon been watchin all that was oin on, carefully coverin his bare
body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench.

"What's this?" said the doctor, risin from his bed. "Please o away,
madam!"

At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed her
dauhter's absence, knocked at the door.

Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the room
and, returnin to her hut, fell sobbin on her bed.

From that time, durin all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, at every
haltin place and wherever they spent a niht, Natasha never left the
wounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expected
from a youn irl either such firmness or such skill in nursin a
wounded man.

Dreadful as the countess imained it would be should Prince Andrew die
in her dauhter's arms durin the journey--as, judin by what the
doctor said, it seemed miht easily happen--she could not oppose
Natasha. Thouh with the intimacy now established between the wounded
man and Natasha the thouht occurred that should he recover their former
enaement would be renewed, no one--least of all Natasha and Prince
Andrew--spoke of this: the unsettled question of life and death, which
hun not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia, shut out all other
considerations.




CHAPTER XXXIII

On the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was achin, the
clothes in which he had slept without undressin felt uncomfortable on
his body, and his mind had a dim consciousness of somethin shameful he
had done the day before. That somethin shameful was his yesterday's
conversation with Captain Ramballe.

It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.
Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seein the pistol with an enraved
stock which erasim had replaced on the writin table, he remembered
where he was and what lay before him that very day.

"Am I not too late?" he thouht. "No, probably he won't make his entry
into Moscow before noon."

Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, but
hastened to act.

After arranin his clothes, he took the pistol and was about to o out.
But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly could
not carry the weapon in his hand throuh the streets. It was difficult
to hide such a bi pistol even under his wide coat. He could not carry
it unnoticed in his belt or under his arm. Besides, it had been
dischared, and he had not had time to reload it. "No matter, daer
will do," he said to himself, thouh when plannin his desin he had
more than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by the
student in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a daer. But as
his chief aim consisted not in carryin out his desin, but in provin
to himself that he would not abandon his intention and was doin all he
could to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jaed daer in a
reen sheath which he had bouht at the Sukharev market with the pistol,
and hid it under his waistcoat.

Havin tied a irdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,
Pierre went down the corridor, tryin to avoid makin a noise or meetin
the captain, and passed out into the street.

The conflaration, at which he had looked with so much indifference the
evenin before, had reatly increased durin the niht. Moscow was on
fire in several places. The buildins in Carriae Row, across the river,
in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy, as well as the bares on the Moskva
River and the timber yards by the Doroomilov Bride, were all ablaze.

Pierre's way led throuh side streets to the Povarskoy and from there to
the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had lon before
decided that the deed should be done. The ates of most of the houses
were locked and the shutters up. The streets and lanes were deserted.
The air was full of smoke and the smell of burnin. Now and then he met
Russians with anxious and timid faces, and Frenchmen with an air not of
the city but of the camp, walkin in the middle of the streets. Both the
Russians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise. Besides his
heiht and stoutness, and the strane morose look of sufferin in his
face and whole fiure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they could
not make out to what class he could belon. The French followed him with
astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the other
Russians who azed at the French with fear and curiosity, paid no
attention to them. At the ate of one house three Frenchmen, who were
explainin somethin to some Russians who did not understand them,
stopped Pierre askin if he did not know French.

Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentinel
standin beside a reen caisson shouted at him, but only when the shout
was threateninly repeated and he heard the click of the man's musket as
he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other side
of the street. He heard nothin and saw nothin of what went on around
him. He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, like
somethin dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previous niht's
experience, he was afraid of losin it. But he was not destined to brin
his mood safely to his destination. And even had he not been hindered by
anythin on the way, his intention could not now have been carried out,
for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on his
way from the Doroomilov suburb to the Kremlin, and was now sittin in a
very loomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin, ivin
detailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately to
extinuish the fire, to prevent lootin, and to reassure the
inhabitants. But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed in
what lay before him, and was tortured--as those are who obstinately
undertake a task that is impossible for them not because of its
difficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures--by the
fear of weakenin at the decisive moment and so losin his self-esteem.

Thouh he heard and saw nothin around him he found his way by instinct
and did not o wron in the side streets that led to the Povarskoy.

As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser--he
even felt the heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tonues of flame rose
from under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in the streets
and they were more excited. But Pierre, thouh he felt that somethin
unusual was happenin around him, did not realize that he was
approachin the fire. As he was oin alon a foot path across a wide-
open space adjoinin the Povarskoy on one side and the ardens of Prince
ruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the desperate
weepin of a woman close to him. He stopped as if awakenin from a dream
and lifted his head.

By the side of the path, on the dusty dry rass, all sorts of household
oods lay in a heap: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. On the
round, beside the trunks, sat a thin woman no loner youn, with lon,
prominent upper teeth, and wearin a black cloak and cap. This woman,
swayin to and fro and mutterin somethin, was chokin with sobs. Two
irls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,
were starin at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their pale
frihtened faces. The younest child, a boy of about seven, who wore an
overcoat and an immense cap evidently not his own, was cryin in his old
nurse's arms. A dirty, barefooted maid was sittin on a trunk, and,
havin undone her pale-colored plait, was pullin it straiht and
sniffin at her sined hair. The woman's husband, a short, round-
shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official, with
sausae-shaped whiskers and showin under his square-set cap the hair
smoothly brushed forward over his temples, with expressionless face was
movin the trunks, which were placed one on another, and was drain
some arments from under them.

As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost threw herself at his feet.

"Dear people, ood Christians, save me, help me, dear friends... help
us, somebody," she muttered between her sobs. "My irl... My dauhter!
My younest dauhter is left behind. She's burned! Ooh! Was it for this
I nursed you.... Ooh!"

"Don't, Mary Nikolievna!" said her husband to her in a low voice,
evidently only to justify himself before the straner. "Sister must have
taken her, or else where can she be?" he added.

"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman anrily, suddenly ceasin to weep.
"You have no heart, you don't feel for your own child! Another man would
have rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster and neither a man
nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," she went on,
addressin Pierre rapidly between her sobs. "The fire broke out
alonside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and we rushed
to collect our thins. We ran out just as we were.... This is what we
have brouht away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.
We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!..." and aain she
bean to sob. "My child, my dear one! Burned, burned!"

"But where was she left?" asked Pierre.

From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this man
miht help her.

"Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizin him by the les. "My benefactor, set
my heart at ease.... Aniska, o, you horrid irl, show him the way!" she
cried to the maid, anrily openin her mouth and still farther exposin
her lon teeth.

"Show me the way, show me, I... I'll do it," asped Pierre rapidly.

The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,
sihed, and went on her short, bare feet alon the path. Pierre felt as
if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held his head
hiher, his eyes shone with the liht of life, and with swift steps he
followed the maid, overtook her, and came out on the Povarskoy. The
whole street was full of clouds of black smoke. Tonues of flame here
and there broke throuh that cloud. A reat number of people crowded in
front of the conflaration. In the middle of the street stood a French
eneral sayin somethin to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by the
maid, was advancin to the spot where the eneral stood, but the French
soldiers stopped him.

"On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice.


* "You can't pass!"

"This way, uncle," cried the irl. "We'll pass throuh the side street,
by the Nikulins'!"

Pierre turned back, ivin a sprin now and then to keep up with her.
She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left, and,
passin three houses, turned into a yard on the riht.

"It's here, close by," said she and, runnin across the yard, opened a
ate in a wooden fence and, stoppin, pointed out to him a small wooden
win of the house, which was burnin brihtly and fiercely. One of its
sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and briht flames issued from
the openins of the windows and from under the roof.

As Pierre passed throuh the fence ate, he was enveloped by hot air and
involuntarily stopped.

"Which is it? Which is your house?" he asked.

"Ooh!" wailed the irl, pointin to the win. "That's it, that was our
lodin. You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious little
missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the siht of the fire felt that she
too must ive expression to her feelins.

Pierre rushed to the win, but the heat was so reat that he
involuntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the lare house that
was as yet burnin only at one end, just below the roof, and around
which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize what
these men, who were drain somethin out, were about; but seein
before him a Frenchman hittin a peasant with a blunt saber and tryin
to take from him a fox-fur coat, he vauely understood that lootin was
oin on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.

The sounds of cracklin and the din of fallin walls and ceilins, the
whistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of the people, and
the siht of the swayin smoke, now atherin into thick black clouds
and now soarin up with litterin sparks, with here and there dense
sheaves of flame (now red and now like olden fish scales creepin alon
the walls), and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion, produced on
Pierre the usual animatin effects of a conflaration. It had a
peculiarly stron effect on him because at the siht of the fire he felt
himself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weihed him down. He felt
youn, briht, adroit, and resolute. He ran round to the other side of
the lode and was about to dash into that part of it which was still
standin, when just above his head he heard several voices shoutin and
then a crackin sound and the rin of somethin heavy fallin close
beside him.

Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the lare house some Frenchmen
who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metal
articles. Other French soldiers standin below went up to the drawer.

"What does this fellow want?" shouted one of them referrin to Pierre.

"There's a child in that house. Haven't you seen a child?" cried Pierre.

"What's he talkin about? et alon!" said several voices, and one of
the soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre miht want to take from them
some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, moved
threateninly toward him.

"A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above. "I did hear somethin
squealin in the arden. Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow is
lookin for. After all, one must be human, you know...."

"Where is it? Where?" said Pierre.

"There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointin to the
arden at the back of the house. "Wait a bit--I'm comin down."

And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with a spot
on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on the
round floor, and clappin Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into the
arden.

"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades. "It's ettin
hot."

When they reached a ravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulled
Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, raveled space where a three-
year-old irl in a pink dress was lyin under a seat.

"There is your child! Oh, a irl, so much the better!" said the
Frenchman. "ood-bye, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal you
know!" and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to his
comrades.

Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little irl and was oin to take
her in his arms. But seein a straner the sickly, scrofulous-lookin
child, unattractively like her mother, bean to yell and run away.
Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in his arms. She screamed
desperately and anrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre's
hands away and to bite them with her slobberin mouth. Pierre was seized
by a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced when
touchin some nasty little animal. But he made an effort not to throw
the child down and ran with her to the lare house. It was now, however,
impossible to et back the way he had come; the maid, Aniska, was no
loner there, and Pierre with a feelin of pity and disust pressed the
wet, painfully sobbin child to himself as tenderly as he could and ran
with her throuh the arden seekin another way out.




CHAPTER XXXIV

Havin run throuh different yards and side streets, Pierre ot back
with his little burden to the ruzinski arden at the corner of the
Povarskoy. He did not at first reconize the place from which he had set
out to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people and oods
that had been draed out of the houses. Besides Russian families who
had taken refue here from the fire with their belonins, there were
several French soldiers in a variety of clothin. Pierre took no notice
of them. He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order to
restore the dauhter to her mother and o to save someone else. Pierre
felt that he had still much to do and to do quickly. lowin with the
heat and from runnin, he felt at that moment more stronly than ever
the sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on him
when he ran to save the child. She had now become quiet and, clinin
with her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm azin about her
like some little wild animal. He lanced at her occasionally with a
sliht smile. He fancied he saw somethin pathetically innocent in that
frihtened, sickly little face.

He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them. He
walked amon the crowd with rapid steps, scannin the various faces he
met. Involuntarily he noticed a eorian or Armenian family consistin
of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearin a new, cloth-
covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar type, and
a youn woman. That very youn woman seemed to Pierre the perfection of
Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched, black eyebrows and
the extraordinarily soft, briht color of her lon, beautiful,
expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and the crowd on the
open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a briht lilac shawl on
her head, suested a delicate exotic plant thrown out onto the snow.
She was sittin on some bundles a little behind the old woman, and
looked from under her lon lashes with motionless, lare, almond-shaped
eyes at the round before her. Evidently she was aware of her beauty and
fearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and, hurryin alon by the
fence, he turned several times to look at her. When he had reached the
fence, still without findin those he souht, he stopped and looked
about him.

With the child in his arms his fiure was now more conspicuous than
before, and a roup of Russians, both men and women, athered about him.

"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the entry yourself,
aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.

Pierre replied that the child beloned to a woman in a black coat who
had been sittin there with her other children, and he asked whether
anyone knew where she had one.

"Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an old deacon, addressin a
pockmarked peasant woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" he added
in his customary bass.

"The Anferovs? No," said the woman. "They left in the mornin. That must
be either Mary Nikolievna's or the Ivanovs'!"

"He says 'a woman,' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady," remarked a house
serf.

"Do you know her? She's thin, with lon teeth," said Pierre.

"That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the arden when these wolves
swooped down," said the woman, pointin to the French soldiers.

"O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon.

"o over that way, they're there. It's she! She kept on lamentin and
cryin," continued the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!"

But Pierre was not listenin to the woman. He had for some seconds been
intently watchin what was oin on a few steps away. He was lookin at
the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had one up to them.
One of these, a nimble little man, was wearin a blue coat tied round
the waist with a rope. He had a nihtcap on his head and his feet were
bare. The other, whose appearance particularly struck Pierre, was a
lon, lank, round-shouldered, fair-haired man, slow in his movements and
with an idiotic expression of face. He wore a woman's loose own of
frieze, blue trousers, and lare torn Hessian boots. The little
barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and,
sayin somethin, immediately seized the old man by his les and the old
man at once bean pullin off his boots. The other in the frieze own
stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian irl and with his hands in
his pockets stood starin at her, motionless and silent.

"Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the
woman, handin the little irl to her. "ive her back to them, ive her
back!" he almost shouted, puttin the child, who bean screamin, on the
round, and aain lookin at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.

The old man was already sittin barefoot. The little Frenchman had
secured his second boot and was slappin one boot aainst the other. The
old man was sayin somethin in a voice broken by sobs, but Pierre
cauht but a limpse of this, his whole attention was directed to the
Frenchman in the frieze own who meanwhile, swayin slowly from side to
side, had drawn nearer to the youn woman and takin his hands from his
pockets had seized her by the neck.

The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude,
with her lon lashes droopin as if she did not see or feel what the
soldier was doin to her.

While Pierre was runnin the few steps that separated him from the
Frenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze own was already tearin from
her neck the necklace the youn Armenian was wearin, and the youn
woman, clutchin at her neck, screamed piercinly.

"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,
seizin the soldier by his round shoulders and throwin him aside.

The soldier fell, ot up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwin down
the boots and drawin his sword, moved threateninly toward Pierre.

"Voyons, Pas de betises!" * he cried.


* "Look here, no nonsense!"

Pierre was in such a transport of rae that he remembered nothin and
his strenth increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted Frenchman
and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off his
feet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approval were heard from
the crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of French
uhlans appeared from round the corner. The uhlans came up at a trot to
Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre remembered nothin
of what happened after that. He only remembered beatin someone and
bein beaten and finally feelin that his hands were bound and that a
crowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searchin him.

"Lieutenant, he has a daer," were the first words Pierre understood.

"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldier
who had been arrested with Pierre. "All riht, you can tell all about it
at the court-martial." Then he turned to Pierre. "Do you speak French?"

Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His face
probably looked very terrible, for the officer said somethin in a
whisper and four more uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves on
both sides of Pierre.

"Do you speak French?" the officer asked aain, keepin at a distance
from Pierre. "Call the interpreter."

A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and by
his clothes and manner of speakin Pierre at once knew him to be a
French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.

"He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after a
searchin look at Pierre.

"Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," remarked the officer. "And
ask him who he is," he added.

"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian. "You must answer
the chief."

"I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner--take me!" Pierre
suddenly replied in French.

"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. "Well then, march!"

A crowd had collected round the uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stood the
pockmarked peasant woman with the little irl, and when the patrol
started she moved forward.

"Where are they takin you to, you poor dear?" said she. "And the little
irl, the little irl, what am I to do with her if she's not theirs?"
said the woman.

"What does that woman want?" asked the officer.

Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the siht of the
little irl he had saved.

"What does she want?" he murmured. "She is brinin me my dauhter whom
I have just saved from the flames," said he. "ood-bye!" And without
knowin how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went alon with
resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.

The French patrol was one of those sent out throuh the various streets
of Moscow by Durosnel's order to put a stop to the pillae, and
especially to catch the incendiaries who, accordin to the eneral
opinion which had that day oriinated amon the hiher French officers,
were the cause of the conflarations. After marchin throuh a number of
streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a small
shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besides
several looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierre
was considered to be the most suspicious of all. When they had all been
brouht for the niht to a lare house on the Zubov Rampart that was
bein used as a uardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict uard.

BOOK TWELVE: 1812




CHAPTER I

In Petersbur at that time a complicated strule was bein carried on
with reater heat than ever in the hihest circles, between the parties
of Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fedorovna, the Tsarevich, and others,
drowned as usual by the buzzin of the court drones. But the calm,
luxurious life of Petersbur, concerned only about phantoms and
reflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,
except by a reat effort, to realize the daner and the difficult
position of the Russian people. There were the same receptions and
balls, the same French theater, the same court interests and service
interests and intriues as usual. Only in the very hihest circles were
attempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.
Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved in
these difficult circumstances. The Empress Marya, concerned for the
welfare of the charitable and educational institutions under her
patronae, had iven directions that they should all be removed to
Kazan, and the thins belonin to these institutions had already been
packed up. The Empress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructions
she would be pleased to ive--with her characteristic Russian patriotism
had replied that she could ive no directions about state institutions
for that was the affair of the soverein, but as far as she personally
was concerned she would be the last to quit Petersbur.

At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of Auust, the very day of the
battle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which was
to be the readin of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sendin
the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Serius. It was rearded as a model
of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasili himself, famed for
his elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress'.) The
art of his readin was supposed to lie in rollin out the words, quite
independently of their meanin, in a loud and sinson voice alternatin
between a despairin wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fell
quite at random on one word and the murmur on another. This readin, as
was always the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had a political
sinificance. That evenin she expected several important personaes who
had to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and aroused
to a patriotic temper. A ood many people had already arrived, but Anna
Pavlovna, not yet seein all those whom she wanted in her drawin room,
did not let the readin bein but wound up the sprins of a eneral
conversation.

The news of the day in Petersbur was the illness of Countess Bezukhova.
She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missed
several atherins of which she was usually ornament, and was said to be
receivin no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersbur doctors who
usually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor who
was treatin her in some new and unusual way.

They all knew very well that the enchantin countess' illness arose from
an inconvenience resultin from marryin two husbands at the same time,
and that the Italian's cure consisted in removin such inconvenience;
but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to think of this or even
appear to know it.

"They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it is anina
pectoris."

"Anina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!"

"They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the anina..." and
the word anina was repeated with reat satisfaction.

"The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when the doctor
told him the case was danerous."

"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchantin woman."

"You are speakin of the poor countess?" said Anna Pavlovna, comin up
just then. "I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a little
better. Oh, she is certainly the most charmin woman in the world," she
went on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belon to different
camps, but that does not prevent my esteemin her as she deserves. She
is very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.

Supposin that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat liftin the
veil from the secret of the countess' malady, an unwary youn man
ventured to express surprise that well known doctors had not been called
in and that the countess was bein attended by a charlatan who miht
employ danerous remedies.

"Your information may be better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenly and
venomously retorted on the inexperienced youn man, "but I know on ood
authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. He is private
physician to the Queen of Spain."

And havin thus demolished the youn man, Anna Pavlovna turned to
another roup where Bilibin was talkin about the Austrians: havin
wrinkled up his face he was evidently preparin to smooth it out aain
and utter one of his mots.

"I think it is delihtful," he said, referrin to a diplomatic note that
had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from the
French by Wittenstein, "the hero of Petropol" as he was then called in
Petersbur.

"What? What's that?" asked Anna Pavlovna, securin silence for the mot,
which she had heard before.

And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, which
he had himself composed.

"The Emperor returns these Austrian banners," said Bilibin, "friendly
banners one astray and found on a wron path," and his brow became
smooth aain.

"Charmin, charmin!" observed Prince Vasili.

"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly and
unexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understandin what he meant.
Prince Hippolyte himself lanced around with amused surprise. He knew no
more than the others what his words meant. Durin his diplomatic career
he had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as very
witty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first words
that entered his head. "It may turn out very well," he thouht, "but if
not, they'll know how to arrane matters." And really, durin the
awkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic person
entered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waitin for and wished to convert,
and she, smilin and shakin a finer at Hippolyte, invited Prince
Vasili to the table and brinin him two candles and the manuscript
beed him to bein. Everyone became silent.

"Most racious Soverein and Emperor!" Prince Vasili sternly declaimed,
lookin round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone had
anythin to say to the contrary. But no one said anythin. "Moscow, our
ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ"--he placed a
sudden emphasis on the word her--"as a mother receives her zealous sons
into her arms, and throuh the atherin mists, foreseein the brilliant
lory of thy rule, sins in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he that
cometh!'"

Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.

Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those present
appeared intimidated, as if askin in what they were to blame. Anna
Pavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old woman
mutterin the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolent
oliath..." she whispered.

Prince Vasili continued.

"Let the bold and insolent oliath from the borders of France encompass
the realms of Russia with death-bearin terrors; humble Faith, the slin
of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirsty
pride. This icon of the Venerable Serius, the servant of od and
zealous champion of old of our country's weal, is offered to Your
Imperial Majesty. I rieve that my wanin strenth prevents rejoicin in
the siht of your most racious presence. I raise fervent prayers to
Heaven that the Almihty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifully
fulfill the desires of Your Majesty."

"What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of reader and
of author.

Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's uests talked for a lon time
of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to the
result of the battle to be fouht in a few days.

"You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor's
birthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!"




CHAPTER II

Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day durin the
service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor's birthday, Prince
Volkonski was called out of the church and received a dispatch from
Prince Kutuzov. It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatarinova on the
day of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated a
step, that the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that he
was writin in haste from the field of battle before collectin full
information. It followed that there must have been a victory. And at
once, without leavin the church, thanks were rendered to the Creator
for His help and for the victory.

Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, and all that mornin a
joyously festive mood reined in the city. Everyone believed the victory
to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon's havin been
captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler for
France.

It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strenth
and completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from the
scene of action. eneral events involuntarily roup themselves around
some particular incident. So now the courtiers' pleasure was based as
much on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor's birthday as
on the fact of the victory itself. It was like a successfully arraned
surprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov's report of the Russian losses,
amon which fiured the names of Tuchkov, Baration, and Kutaysov. In
the Petersbur world this sad side of the affair aain involuntarily
centered round a sinle incident: Kutaysov's death. Everybody knew him,
the Emperor liked him, and he was youn and interestin. That day
everyone met with the words:

"What a wonderful coincidence! Just durin the service. But what a loss
Kutaysov is! How sorry I am!"

"What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with a prophet's
pride. "I always said he was the only man capable of defeatin
Napoleon."

But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood rew
anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the sufferin the suspense
occasioned the Emperor.

"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead of extollin
Kutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the cause
of the Emperor's anxiety. That day Prince Vasili no loner boasted of
his protee Kutuzov, but remained silent when the commander-in-chief was
mentioned. Moreover, toward evenin, as if everythin conspired to make
Petersbur society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news was
added. Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terrible
malady it had been so areeable to mention. Officially, at lare
atherins, everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a terrible
attack of anina pectoris, but in intimate circles details were
mentioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain had
prescribed small doses of a certain dru to produce a certain effect;
but Helene, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her and
that her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profliate
Pierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very lare dose of the
dru, and had died in aony before assistance could be rendered her. It
was said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon the
Italian, but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunate
deceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.

Talk in eneral centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor's
lack of news, the loss of Kutaysov, and the death of Helene.

On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country entleman arrived from
Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread throuh
the whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to be
in! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasili durin the visits of
condolence paid to him on the occasion of his dauhter's death said of
Kutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in his
rief to foret what he had said), that it was impossible to expect
anythin else from a blind and depraved old man.

"I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to such
a man."

As lon as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,
but the next day the followin communication was received from Count
Rostopchin:

Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brouht me a letter in which he demands
police officers to uide the army to the Ryazan road. He writes that he
is reretfully abandonin Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov's action decides the
fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn of
the abandonment of the city in which her reatness is centered and in
which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I have
had everythin removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fate
of my fatherland.

On receivin this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzov
with the followin rescript:

Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of Auust I have
received no communication from you, yet on the first of September I
received from the commander-in-chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sad
news that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You can
yourself imaine the effect this news has had on me, and your silence
increases my astonishment. I am sendin this by Adjutant-eneral Prince
Volkonski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasons
that have induced you to take this melancholy decision.




CHAPTER III

Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messener from Kutuzov
reached Petersbur with the official announcement of that event. This
messener was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who was
quoique etraner, russe de coeur et d'ame, * as he said of himself.


* Thouh a foreiner, Russian in heart and soul.

The Emperor at once received this messener in his study at the palace
on Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campain
and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) when
he appeared before notre tres racieux souverain * with the news of the
burnin of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaient sa route. *(2)


* Our most racious soverein.

* (2) Whose flames illumined his route.

Thouh the source of M. Michaud's charin must have been different from
that which caused Russians to rieve, he had such a sad face when shown
into the Emperor's study that the latter at once asked:

"Have you brouht me sad news, Colonel?"

"Very sad, sire," replied Michaud, lowerin his eyes with a sih. "The
abandonment of Moscow."

"Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" asked the
Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushin.

Michaud respectfully delivered the messae Kutuzov had entrusted to him,
which was that it had been impossible to fiht before Moscow, and that
as the only remainin choice was between losin the army as well as
Moscow, or losin Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose the
latter.

The Emperor listened in silence, not lookin at Michaud.

"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked.

"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,"
replied Michaud in a decided tone, but lancin at the Emperor he was
frihtened by what he had done.

The Emperor bean to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower lip
trembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.

But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blamin
himself for his weakness, and raisin his head addressed Michaud in a
firm voice:

"I see, Colonel, from all that is happenin, that Providence requires
reat sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all thins to
His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it saw
my ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not notice
discouraement?..."

Seein that his most racious ruler was calm once more, Michaud also
rew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor's
direct and relevant question which required a direct answer.

"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?" he
asked to ain time.

"Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor. "Conceal nothin
from me, I wish to know absolutely how thins are."

"Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on his
lips, havin now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the whole
army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception in
desperate and aonized terror..."

"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frownin sternly. "Would
misfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!"

Michaud had only waited for this to brin out the phrase he had
prepared.

"Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, "they are only afraid lest
Your Majesty, in the oodness of your heart, should allow yourself to be
persuaded to make peace. They are burnin for the combat," declared this
representative of the Russian nation, "and to prove to Your Majesty by
the sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are...."

"Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly leam in his eyes,
he patted Michaud on the shoulder. "You set me at ease, Colonel."

He bent his head and was silent for some time.

"Well, then, o back to the army," he said, drawin himself up to his
full heiht and addressin Michaud with a racious and majestic esture,
"and tell our brave men and all my ood subjects wherever you o that
when I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of my
beloved nobility and my ood peasants and so use the last resources of
my empire. It still offers me more than my enemies suppose," said the
Emperor rowin more and more animated; "but should it ever be ordained
by Divine Providence," he continued, raisin to heaven his fine eyes
shinin with emotion, "that my dynasty should cease to rein on the
throne of my ancestors, then after exhaustin all the means at my
command, I shall let my beard row to here" (he pointed halfway down his
chest) "and o and eat potatoes with the meanest of my peasants, rather
than sin the disrace of my country and of my beloved people whose
sacrifices I know how to appreciate."

Havin uttered these words in an aitated voice the Emperor suddenly
turned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,
and went to the further end of his study. Havin stood there a few
moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbow
with a viorous movement. The Emperor's mild and handsome face was
flushed and his eyes leamed with resolution and aner.

"Colonel Michaud, do not foret what I say to you here, perhaps we may
recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I," said the Emperor,
touchin his breast. "We can no loner both rein toether. I have
learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more...."

And the Emperor paused, with a frown.

When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution in
the Emperor's eyes, Michaud--quoique etraner, russe de coeur et d'ame--
at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had heard
(as he used afterwards to say), and ave expression to his own feelins
and those of the Russian people whose representative he considered
himself to be, in the followin words:

"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment sinin the lory of
the nation and the salvation of Europe!"

With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.




CHAPTER IV

It is natural for us who were not livin in those days to imaine that
when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleein to
distant provinces, and one levy after another was bein raised for the
defense of the fatherland, all Russians from the reatest to the least
were solely enaed in sacrificin themselves, savin their fatherland,
or weepin over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that time
without exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion,
despair, rief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not really
so. It appears so to us because we see only the eneral historic
interest of that time and do not see all the personal human interests
that people had. Yet in reality those personal interests of the moment
so much transcend the eneral interests that they always prevent the
public interest from bein felt or even noticed. Most of the people at
that time paid no attention to the eneral proress of events but were
uided only by their private interests, and they were the very people
whose activities at that period were most useful.

Those who tried to understand the eneral course of events and to take
part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless members
of society, they saw everythin upside down, and all they did for the
common ood turned out to be useless and foolish--like Pierre's and
Mamonov's reiments which looted Russian villaes, and the lint the
youn ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.
Even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressin their feelins,
who discussed Russia's position at the time involuntarily introduced
into their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood or
useless condemnation and aner directed aainst people accused of
actions no one could possibly be uilty of. In historic events the rule
forbiddin us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowlede is specially
applicable. Only unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a part
in an historic event never understands its sinificance. If he tries to
realize it his efforts are fruitless.

The more closely a man was enaed in the events then takin place in
Russia the less did he realize their sinificance. In Petersbur and in
the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and entlemen in
militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked of
self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscow
there was little talk or thouht of Moscow, and when they cauht siht
of its burned ruins no one swore to be avened on the French, but they
thouht about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matreshka the
vivandiere, and like matters.

As the war had cauht him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took a close
and proloned part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,
without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what was
oin on in Russia without despair and without dismally rackin his
brains over it. Had he been asked what he thouht of the state of
Russia, he would have said that it was not his business to think about
it, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he had
heard that the reiments were to be made up to their full strenth, that
fihtin would probably o on for a lon time yet, and that thins bein
so it was quite likely he miht be in command of a reiment in a couple
of years' time.

As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was bein
sent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division, not only without
reret at bein prevented from takin part in the comin battle, but
with the reatest pleasure--which he did not conceal and which his
comrades fully understood.

A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received the
necessary money and warrants, and havin sent some hussars on in
advance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.

Only a man who has experienced it--that is, has passed some months
continuously in an atmosphere of campainin and war--can understand the
deliht Nicholas felt when he escaped from the reion covered by the
army's forain operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When--free
from soldiers, waons, and the filthy traces of a camp--he saw villaes
with peasants and peasant women, entlemen's country houses, fields
where cattle were razin, posthouses with stationmasters asleep in
them, he rejoiced as thouh seein all this for the first time. What for
a lon while specially surprised and delihted him were the women, youn
and healthy, without a dozen officers makin up to each of them; women,
too, who were pleased and flattered that a passin officer should joke
with them.

In the hihest spirits Nicholas arrived at niht at a hotel in Voronezh,
ordered thins he had lon been deprived of in camp, and next day, very
clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a lon
time, went to present himself to the authorities.

The commander of the militia was a civilian eneral, an old man who was
evidently pleased with his military desination and rank. He received
Nicholas brusquely (imainin this to be characteristically military)
and questioned him with an important air, as if considerin the eneral
proress of affairs and approvin and disapprovin with full riht to do
so. Nicholas was in such ood spirits that this merely amused him.

From the commander of the militia he drove to the overnor. The overnor
was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the stud
farms at which Nicholas miht procure horses, recommended to him a horse
dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who had
the best horses, and promised to assist him in every way.

"You are Count Ilya Rostov's son? My wife was a reat friend of your
mother's. We are at home on Thursdays--today is Thursday, so please come
and see us quite informally," said the overnor, takin leave of him.

Immediately on leavin the overnor's, Nicholas hired post horses and,
takin his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a allop to the
landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everythin seemed to
him pleasant and easy durin that first part of his stay in Voronezh
and, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind,
everythin went well and easily.

The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, a
horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy and
some old Hunarian wine, who had a snuery where he smoked, and who
owned some splendid horses.

In very few words Nicholas bouht seventeen picked stallions for six
thousand rubles--to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts. After
dinin and takin rather too much of the Hunarian wine, Nicholas--
havin exchaned kisses with the landowner, with whom he was already on
the friendliest terms--alloped back over abominable roads, in the
brihtest frame of mind, continually urin on the driver so as to be in
time for the overnor's party.

When he had chaned, poured water over his head, and scented himself,
Nicholas arrived at the overnor's rather late, but with the phrase
"better late than never" on his lips.

It was not a ball, nor had dancin been announced, but everyone knew
that Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on the
clavichord and that there would be dancin, and so everyone had come as
to a ball.

Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with this
difference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the
arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everythin that
went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an
"in for a penny, in for a pound--who cares?" spirit, and the inevitable
small talk, instead of turnin on the weather and mutual acquaintances,
now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.

The society athered toether at the overnor's was the best in
Voronezh.

There were a reat many ladies and some of Nicholas' Moscow
acquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with the
cavalier of St. eore, the hussar remount officer, the ood-natured and
well-bred Count Rostov. Amon the men was an Italian prisoner, an
officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that
prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian was,
as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him that
everyone rearded the Italian in the same liht, and he treated him
cordially thouh with dinity and restraint.

As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusin around him
a frarance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words "better late
than never" and heard them repeated several times by others, people
clustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once that
he had entered into his proper position in the province--that of a
universal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatinly so
after his lon privations. At postin stations, at inns, and in the
landowner's snuery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, and
here too at the overnor's party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)
an inexhaustible number of pretty youn women, married and unmarried,
impatiently awaitin his notice. The women and irls flirted with him
and, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to et this
fine youn daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Amon these
was the overnor's wife herself, who welcomed Rostov as a near relative
and called him "Nicholas."

Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, and
dancin bean in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincial
society by his aility. His particularly free manner of dancin even
surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way he
danced that evenin. He had never danced like that in Moscow and would
even have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and in
bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all by
somethin unusual, somethin they would have to accept as the reular
thin in the capital thouh new to them in the provinces.

All the evenin Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump and
pleasin little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.
With the naive conviction of youn men in a merry mood that other men's
wives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady's side and
treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,
without speakin of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the lady
would et on toether. The husband, however, did not seem to share that
conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov. But the latter's
ood-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even he
involuntarily yielded to Nicholas' ood humor. Toward the end of the
evenin, however, as the wife's face rew more flushed and animated, the
husband's became more and more melancholy and solemn, as thouh there
were but a iven amount of animation between them and as the wife's
share increased the husband's diminished.




CHAPTER V

Nicholas sat leanin slihtly forward in an armchair, bendin closely
over the blonde lady and payin her mytholoical compliments with a
smile that never left his face. Jauntily shiftin the position of his
les in their tiht ridin breeches, diffusin an odor of perfume, and
admirin his partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his les in
their well-fittin Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he
wished to run away with a certain lady here in Voronezh.

"Which lady?"

"A charmin lady, a divine one. Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at his
partner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her fiure" (he lanced
at her shoulders) "like Diana's...."

The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talkin
about.

"Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, risin politely, and as if wishin
Nikita Ivanych to share his joke, he bean to tell him of his intention
to elope with a blonde lady.

The husband smiled loomily, the wife aily. The overnor's ood-natured
wife came up with a look of disapproval.

"Anna Inatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she, pronouncin the
name so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Inatyevna was a very
important person. "Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?"

"Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?"

"Anna Inatyevna Malvintseva. She has heard from her niece how you
rescued her... Can you uess?"

"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas.

"Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya. She is here in Voronezh with her aunt.
Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?"

"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!"

"Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!"

The overnor's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with a
blue headdress, who had just finished her ame of cards with the most
important personaes of the town. This was Malvintseva, Princess Mary's
aunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow who always lived in
Voronezh. When Rostov approached her she was standin settlin up for
the ame. She looked at him and, screwin up her eyes sternly, continued
to upbraid the eneral who had won from her.

"Very pleased, mon cher," she then said, holdin out her hand to
Nicholas. "Pray come and see me."

After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
Malvintseva had evidently not liked, and havin asked what Nicholas knew
of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, the
important old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeatin her invitation to
come to see her.

Nicholas promised to come and blushed aain as he bowed. At the mention
of Princess Mary he experienced a feelin of shyness and even of fear,
which he himself did not understand.

When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to the
dancin, but the overnor's little wife placed her plump hand on his
sleeve and, sayin that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him to
her sittin room, from which those who were there immediately withdrew
so as not to be in her way.

"Do you know, dear boy," bean the overnor's wife with a serious
expression on her kind little face, "that really would be the match for
you: would you like me to arrane it?"

"Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicholas.

"I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petrovna
speaks of Lily, but I say, no--the princess! Do you want me to do it? I
am sure your mother will be rateful to me. What a charmin irl she is,
really! And she is not at all so plain, either."

"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. "As befits a
soldier, Aunt, I don't force myself on anyone or refuse anythin," he
said before he had time to consider what he was sayin.

"Well then, remember, this is not a joke!"

"Of course not!"

"Yes, yes," the overnor's wife said as if talkin to herself. "But, my
dear boy, amon other thins you are too attentive to the other, the
blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really...."

"Oh no, we are ood friends with him," said Nicholas in the simplicity
of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant to
himself miht not be pleasant to someone else.

"But what nonsense I have been sayin to the overnor's wife!" thouht
Nicholas suddenly at supper. "She will really bein to arrane a
match... and Sonya...?" And on takin leave of the overnor's wife, when
she aain smilinly said to him, "Well then, remember!" he drew her
aside.

"But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt..."

"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.

Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimate
thouhts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or his
friend) to this woman who was almost a straner. When he afterwards
recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness which
had very important results for him, it seemed to him--as it seems to
everyone in such cases--that it was merely some silly whim that seized
him: yet that burst of frankness, toether with other triflin events,
had immense consequences for him and for all his family.

"You see, Aunt, Mamma has lon wanted me to marry an heiress, but the
very idea of marryin for money is repunant to me."

"Oh yes, I understand," said the overnor's wife.

"But Princess Bolkonskaya--that's another matter. I will tell you the
truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; and
then, after I met her under such circumstances--so stranely, the idea
often occurred to me: 'This is fate.' Especially if you remember that
Mamma had lon been thinkin of it; but I had never happened to meet her
before, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as lon
as my sister Natasha was enaed to her brother it was of course out of
the question for me to think of marryin her. And it must needs happen
that I should meet her just when Natasha's enaement had been broken
off... and then everythin... So you see... I never told this to anyone
and never will, only to you."

The overnor's wife pressed his elbow ratefully.

"You know Sonya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, and
will do so.... So you see there can be no question about-" said Nicholas
incoherently and blushin.

"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothin and
you yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. And what
about your mother? It would kill her, that's one thin. And what sort of
life would it be for Sonya--if she's a irl with a heart? Your mother in
despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sonya ouht to
understand that."

Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these aruments.

"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sih, after a
short pause. "Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she is
now in mournin. How can one think of it!"

"But you don't suppose I'm oin to et you married at once? There is
always a riht way of doin thins," replied the overnor's wife.

"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt..." said Nicholas, kissin her plump
little hand.




CHAPTER VI

On reachin Moscow after her meetin with Rostov, Princess Mary had
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
ivin her instructions how to et to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh.
That feelin akin to temptation which had tormented her durin her
father's illness, since his death, and especially since her meetin with
Rostov was smothered by arranements for the journey, anxiety about her
brother, settlin in a new house, meetin new people, and attendin to
her nephew's education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quiet
surroundins, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father which
was associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was aitated and
incessantly tortured by the thouht of the daners to which her brother,
the only intimate person now remainin to her, was exposed. She was
worried too about her nephew's education for which she had always felt
herself incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace--a
peace arisin from consciousness of havin stifled those personal dreams
and hopes that had been on the point of awakenin within her and were
related to her meetin with Rostov.

The day after her party the overnor's wife came to see Malvintseva and,
after discussin her plan with the aunt, remarked that thouh under
present circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to be
thouht of, all the same the youn people miht be brouht toether and
could et to know one another. Malvintseva expressed approval, and the
overnor's wife bean to speak of Rostov in Mary's presence, praisin
him and tellin how he had blushed when Princess Mary's name was
mentioned. But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyful
feelin--her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,
self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.

Durin the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Mary
continually thouht of how she ouht to behave to him. First she decided
not to come to the drawin room when he called to see her aunt--that it
would not be proper for her, in her deep mournin, to receive visitors;
then she thouht this would be rude after what he had done for her; then
it occurred to her that her aunt and the overnor's wife had intentions
concernin herself and Rostov--their looks and words at times seemed to
confirm this supposition--then she told herself that only she, with her
sinful nature, could think this of them: they could not foret that
situated as she was, while still wearin deep mournin, such matchmakin
would be an insult to her and to her father's memory. Assumin that she
did o down to see him, Princess Mary imained the words he would say to
her and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemed
undeservedly cold and then to mean too much. More than anythin she
feared lest the confusion she felt miht overwhelm her and betray her as
soon as she saw him.

But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawin
room that Count Rostov had called, the princess showed no confusion,
only a sliht blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new
and radiant liht.

"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herself to
understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.

When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for an
instant, as if to ive the visitor time to reet her aunt, and then just
as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with
shinin eyes. With a movement full of dinity and race she half rose
with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,
and bean to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep
womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawin
room, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself a
consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meetin a
man she wished to attract.

"Either black is particularly becomin to her or she really has reatly
improved without my havin noticed it. And above all, what tact and
race!" thouht Mademoiselle Bourienne.

Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she would
have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the chane that
had taken place in herself. From the moment she reconized that dear,
loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her to
speak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostov entered, her
face became suddenly transformed. It was as if a liht had been kindled
in a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artistic
work on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaninless,
was suddenly shown up in unexpected and strikin beauty. For the first
time all that pure, spiritual, inward travail throuh which she had
lived appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction
with herself, her sufferins, her strivins after oodness, her
meekness, love, and self-sacrifice--all this now shone in those radiant
eyes, in her delicate smile, and in every trait of her entle face.

Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. He
felt that the bein before him was quite different from, and better
than, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.

Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of the
war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaerated their sorrow about
it; they spoke of their last meetin--Nicholas tryin to chane the
subject--they talked of the overnor's kind wife, of Nicholas'
relations, and of Princess Mary's.

She did not talk about her brother, divertin the conversation as soon
as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia's
misfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother was too near
her heart and she neither could nor would speak lihtly of him. Nicholas
noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary's character
with an observation unusual to him, and everythin confirmed his
conviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary bein.
Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about the
princess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thouht of
her, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all what
he had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at the
moment.

When a pause occurred durin his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual when
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, caressin him
and askin whether he would like to be an hussar. He took the boy on his
knee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With a
softened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms of
the man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as if
understandin it, flushed with pleasure and bean to kiss the boy with
ood natured playfulness.

As she was in mournin Princess Mary did not o out into society, and
Nicholas did not think it the proper thin to visit her aain; but all
the same the overnor's wife went on with her matchmakin, passin on to
Nicholas the flatterin thins Princess Mary said of him and vice versa,
and insistin on his declarin himself to Princess Mary. For this
purpose she arraned a meetin between the youn people at the bishop's
house before Mass.

Thouh Rostov told the overnor's wife that he would not make any
declaration to Princess Mary, he promised to o.

As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybody
considered riht was riht, so now, after a short but sincere strule
between his effort to arrane his life by his own sense of justice, and
in obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yielded
to the power he felt irresistibly carryin him he knew not where. He
knew that after his promise to Sonya it would be what he deemed base to
declare his feelins to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would never
act basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)
that by resinin himself now to the force of circumstances and to those
who were uidin him, he was not only doin nothin wron, but was doin
somethin very important--more important than anythin he had ever done
in his life.

After meetin Princess Mary, thouh the course of his life went on
externally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for him
and he often thouht about her. But he never thouht about her as he had
thouht of all the youn ladies without exception whom he had met in
society, nor as he had for a lon time, and at one time rapturously,
thouht about Sonya. He had pictured each of those youn ladies as
almost all honest-hearted youn men do, that is, as a possible wife,
adaptin her in his imaination to all the conditions of married life: a
white dressin own, his wife at the tea table, his wife's carriae,
little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and so on--and
these pictures of the future had iven him pleasure. But with Princess
Mary, to whom they were tryin to et him enaed, he could never
picture anythin of future married life. If he tried, his pictures
seemed inconruous and false. It made him afraid.




CHAPTER VII

The dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killed and
wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reached
Voronezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, havin learned of
her brother's wound only from the azette and havin no definite news of
him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her aain himself) to
set off in search of Prince Andrew.

When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and the abandonment
of Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, aner, the desire for
veneance, or any feelin of that kind, but everythin in Voronezh
suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced an
indefinite feelin of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heard
seemed to him insincere; he did not know how to jude all these affairs
and felt that only in the reiment would everythin aain become clear
to him. He made haste to finish buyin the horses, and often became
unreasonably anry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.

A few days before his departure a special thanksivin, at which
Nicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.
He stood a little behind the overnor and held himself with military
decorum throuh the service, meditatin on a reat variety of subjects.
When the service was over the overnor's wife beckoned him to her.

"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicatin with a movement of
her head a lady standin on the opposite side, beyond the choir.

Nicholas immediately reconized Princess Mary not so much by the profile
he saw under her bonnet as by the feelin of solicitude, timidity, and
pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently enrossed
by her thouhts, was crossin herself for the last time before leavin
the church.

Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he had
seen before, there was the same eneral expression of refined, inner,
spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. There was a
pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurred
before when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waitin to
be prompted by the overnor's wife and not askin himself whether or not
it was riht and proper to address her here in church, and told her he
had heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul. As soon as
she heard his voice a vivid low kindled in her face, lihtin up both
her sorrow and her joy.

"There is one thin I wanted to tell you, Princess," said Rostov. "It is
that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were not livin, it
would have been at once announced in the azette, as he is a colonel."

The princess looked at him, not raspin what he was sayin, but cheered
by the expression of reretful sympathy on his face.

"And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound" (the azette said
it was a shell) "either provin fatal at once or bein very sliht,"
continued Nicholas. "We must hope for the best, and I am sure..."

Princess Mary interrupted him.

"Oh, that would be so dread..." she bean and, prevented by aitation
from finishin, she bent her head with a movement as raceful as
everythin she did in his presence and, lookin up at him ratefully,
went out, followin her aunt.

That evenin Nicholas did not o out, but stayed at home to settle some
accounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished that business it
was already too late to o anywhere but still too early to o to bed,
and for a lon time he paced up and down the room, reflectin on his
life, a thin he rarely did.

Princess Mary had made an areeable impression on him when he had met
her in Smolensk province. His havin encountered her in such exceptional
circumstances, and his mother havin at one time mentioned her to him as
a ood match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met her
aain in Voronezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasin
but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty he
observed in her at this time. He was, however, preparin to o away and
it had not entered his head to reret that he was thus deprivin himself
of chances of meetin her. But that day's encounter in church had, he
felt, sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale,
sad, refined face, that radiant look, those entle raceful estures,
and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features
aitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostov could not bear to
see the expression of a hiher spiritual life (that was why he did not
like Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophy
and dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed the
depth of a whole spiritual world forein to him was an irresistible
attraction.

"She must be a wonderful woman. A real anel!" he said to himself. "Why
am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And he
involuntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one and
the abundance of it in the other--a spirituality he himself lacked and
therefore valued most hihly. He tried to picture what would happen were
he free. How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife.
But no, he could not imaine that. He felt awed, and no clear picture
presented itself to his mind. He had lon ao pictured to himself a
future with Sonya, and that was all clear and simple just because it had
all been thouht out and he knew all there was in Sonya, but it was
impossible to picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did not
understand her but simply loved her.

Reveries about Sonya had had somethin merry and playful in them, but to
dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frihtenin.

"How she prayed!" he thouht. "It was plain that her whole soul was in
her prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am sure
her prayer will be answered. Why don't I pray for what I want?" he
suddenly thouht. "What do I want? To be free, released from Sonya...
She was riht," he thouht, rememberin what the overnor's wife had
said: "Nothin but misfortune can come of marryin Sonya. Muddles, rief
for Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles!
Besides, I don't love her--not as I should. O, od! release me from this
dreadful, inextricable position!" he suddenly bean to pray. "Yes,
prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray as
Natasha and I used to as children, that the snow miht turn into suar--
and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so. No, but I
am not prayin for trifles now," he thouht as he put his pipe down in a
corner, and foldin his hands placed himself before the icon. Softened
by memories of Princess Mary he bean to pray as he had not done for a
lon time. Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the door opened
and Lavrushka came in with some papers.

"Blockhead! Why do you come in without bein called?" cried Nicholas,
quickly chanin his attitude.

"From the overnor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice. "A courier has
arrived and there's a letter for you."

"Well, all riht, thanks. You can o!"

Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and the
other from Sonya. He reconized them by the handwritin and opened
Sonya's first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and his
eyes opened wide with fear and joy.

"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.

Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holdin the letter and
readin it. He lanced throuh it, then read it aain, and then aain,
and standin still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders,
stretchin out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.
What he had just been prayin for with confidence that od would hear
him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it were
somethin extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that it
had happened so quickly proved that it had not come from od to whom he
had prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.

This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letter
from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from which
there had seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate events--
the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs' Moscow property--and the
countess' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry Princess
Bolkonskaya, toether with his silence and coldness of late, had all
combined to make her decide to release him from his promise and set him
completely free.

It would be too painful to me to think that I miht be a cause of sorrow
or discord in the family that has been so ood to me (she wrote), and my
love has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I be
you to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite of
everythin, no one can love you more than does

Your Sonya

Both letters were written from Troitsa. The other, from the countess,
described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and the
destruction of all their property. In this letter the countess also
mentioned that Prince Andrew was amon the wounded travelin with them;
his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now more
hope. Sonya and Natasha were nursin him.

Next day Nicholas took his mother's letter and went to see Princess
Mary. Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natasha nursin him"
miht mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost as
intimate with the princess as if they were relations.

The followin day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl,
and a few days later left to rejoin his reiment.




CHAPTER VIII

Sonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answer to
Nicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thouht of ettin Nicholas
married to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind more and more. She
knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happenin, and Sonya's
life in the countess' house had rown harder and harder, especially
after they had received a letter from Nicholas tellin of his meetin
with Princess Mary in Boucharovo. The countess let no occasion slip of
makin humiliatin or cruel allusions to Sonya.

But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by all that
was oin on, she called Sonya to her and, instead of reproachin and
makin demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself and
repay all that the family had done for her by breakin off her
enaement with Nicholas.

"I shall not be at peace till you promise me this."

Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied throuh her sobs that she
would do anythin and was prepared for anythin, but ave no actual
promise and could not brin herself to decide to do what was demanded of
her. She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared and
brouht her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya's habit. Her
position in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show her
worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doin it. But in all her
former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that they
raised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her more
worthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anythin in the world. But
now they wanted her to sacrifice the very thin that constituted the
whole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meanin of her life.
And for the first time she felt bitterness aainst those who had been
her benefactors only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealous
of Natasha who had never experienced anythin of this sort, had never
needed to sacrifice herself, but made others sacrifice themselves for
her and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sonya felt
that out of her pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feelin was
beinnin to row up which was stroner than principle, virtue, or
reliion. Under the influence of this feelin Sonya, whose life of
dependence had tauht her involuntarily to be secretive, havin answered
the countess in vaue eneral terms, avoided talkin with her and
resolved to wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set him
free but on the contrary at that meetin to bind him to her forever.

The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifled the
loomy thouhts that oppressed Sonya. She was lad to find escape from
them in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew's
presence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and for
Natasha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feelin that od
did not intend her to be separated from Nicholas. She knew that Natasha
loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. She
knew that bein thrown toether aain under such terrible circumstances
they would aain fall in love with one another, and that Nicholas would
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
prohibited derees of affinity. Despite all the terror of what had
happened durin those last days and durin the first days of their
journey, this feelin that Providence was intervenin in her personal
affairs cheered Sonya.

At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a
whole day.

Three lare rooms were assined to them in the monastery hostelry, one
of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much better
that day and Natasha was sittin with him. In the next room sat the
count and countess respectfully conversin with the prior, who was
callin on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.
Sonya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and
Natasha were talkin about. She heard the sound of their voices throuh
the door. That door opened and Natasha came out, lookin excited. Not
noticin the monk, who had risen to reet her and was drawin back the
wide sleeve on his riht arm, she went up to Sonya and took her hand.

"Natasha, what are you about? Come here!" said the countess.

Natasha went up to the monk for his blessin, and he advised her to pray
for aid to od and His saint.

As soon as the prior withdrew, Natasha took her friend by the hand and
went with her into the unoccupied room.

"Sonya, will he live?" she asked. "Sonya, how happy I am, and how
unhappy!... Sonya, dovey, everythin is as it used to be. If only he
lives! He cannot... because... because... of" and Natasha burst into
tears.

"Yes! I knew it! Thank od!" murmured Sonya. "He will live."

Sonya was not less aitated than her friend by the latter's fear and
rief and by her own personal feelins which she shared with no one.
Sobbin, she kissed and comforted Natasha. "If only he lives!" she
thouht. Havin wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the two
friends went toether to Prince Andrew's door. Natasha opened it
cautiously and lanced into the room, Sonya standin beside her at the
half-open door.

Prince Andrew was lyin raised hih on three pillows. His pale face was
calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his reular breathin.

"O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catchin her companion's
arm and steppin back from the door.

"What? What is it?" asked Natasha.

"It's that, that..." said Sonya, with a white face and tremblin lips.

Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window, not
yet understandin what the latter was tellin her.

"You remember," said Sonya with a solemn and frihtened expression. "You
remember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otradnoe at
Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?"

"Yes, yes!" cried Natasha openin her eyes wide, and vauely recallin
that Sonya had told her somethin about Prince Andrew whom she had seen
lyin down.

"You remember?" Sonya went on. "I saw it then and told everybody, you
and Dunyasha. I saw him lyin on a bed," said she, makin a esture with
her hand and a lifted finer at each detail, "and that he had his eyes
closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands were
folded," she concluded, convincin herself that the details she had just
seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.

She had in fact seen nothin then but had mentioned the first thin that
came into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now as
real as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she had
then said--that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with
somethin red--but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said
that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed.

"Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thouht she too
remembered the word pink bein used, and saw in this the most
extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.

"But what does it mean?" she added meditatively.

"Oh, I don't know, it is all so strane," replied Sonya, clutchin at
her head.

A few minutes later Prince Andrew ran and Natasha went to him, but
Sonya, feelin unusually excited and touched, remained at the window
thinkin about the straneness of what had occurred.

They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and the
countess was writin to her son.

"Sonya!" said the countess, raisin her eyes from her letter as her
niece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in a soft,
tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles
Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Those
eyes expressed entreaty, shame at havin to ask, fear of a refusal, and
readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.

Sonya went up to the countess and, kneelin down, kissed her hand.

"Yes, Mamma, I will write," said she.

Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred that
day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her
vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha's relations with
Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marryin Princess Mary, she
was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificin spirit in
which she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyful
consciousness of performin a mananimous deed--interrupted several
times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes--she wrote that
touchin letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.




CHAPTER IX

The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with
hostility but yet with respect, in the uardhouse to which he was taken.
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as to
who he miht be--perhaps a very important person--and hostility as a
result of their recent personal conflict with him.

But when the uard was relieved next mornin, Pierre felt that for the
new uard--both officers and men--he was not as interestin as he had
been to his captors; and in fact the uard of the second day did not
reconize in this bi, stout man in a peasant coat the viorous person
who had fouht so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had
uttered those solemn words about savin a child; they saw in him only
No. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reason
by order of the Hiher Command. If they noticed anythin remarkable
about Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration and
thouhtfulness, and the way he spoke French, which struck them as
surprisinly ood. In spite of this he was placed that day with the
other arrested suspects, as the separate room he had occupied was
required by an officer.

All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,
reconizin him as a entleman, they all avoided him, more especially as
he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearin them makin fun of him.

That evenin he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, amon
them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was taken
with the others to a house where a French eneral with a white mustache
sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.
With the precision and definiteness customary in addressin prisoners,
and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the others
was questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,
and so on.

These questions, like questions put at trials enerally, left the
essence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence's
bein revealed, and were desined only to form a channel throuh which
the judes wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to
the desired result, namely a conviction. As soon as Pierre bean to say
anythin that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed and
the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accused
always feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions were
put to him. He had a feelin that it was only out of condescension or a
kind of civility that this device of placin a channel was employed. He
knew he was in these men's power, that only by force had they brouht
him there, that force alone ave them the riht to demand answers to
their questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was to
inculpate him. And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate him,
this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It was
evident that any answer would lead to conviction. When asked what he was
doin when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather traic manner
that he was restorin to its parents a child he had saved from the
flames. Why had he fouht the marauder? Pierre answered that he "was
protectin a woman," and that "to protect a woman who was bein insulted
was the duty of every man; that..." They interrupted him, for this was
not to the point. Why was he in the yard of a burnin house where
witnesses had seen him? He replied that he had one out to see what was
happenin in Moscow. Aain they interrupted him: they had not asked
where he was oin, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they
asked, repeatin their first question, which he had declined to answer.
Aain he replied that he could not answer it.

"Put that down, that's bad... very bad," sternly remarked the eneral
with the white mustache and red flushed face.

On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.

Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant's
house near the Crimean bride. On his way throuh the streets Pierre
felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to han over the whole city.
Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realize the
sinificance of the burnin of Moscow, and looked at the fires with
horror.

He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bride and
durin that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that all
those confined there were awaitin a decision which miht come any day
from the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from the
soldiers. Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a very hih and
rather mysterious power.

These first days, before the eihth of September when the prisoners were
had up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.




CHAPTER X

On the eihth of September an officer--a very important one judin by
the respect the uards showed him--entered the coach house where the
prisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holdin
a paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, namin
Pierre as "the man who does not ive his name." lancin indolently and
indifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in chare to
have them decently dressed and tidied up before takin them to the
marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre with
thirteen others was led to the Virin's Field. It was a fine day, sunny
after rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not han low
as on the day when Pierre had been taken from the uardhouse on the
Zubovski rampart, but rose throuh the pure air in columns. No flames
were seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as far
as Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there were
waste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standin, and
here and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre azed at
the ruins and did not reconize districts he had known well. Here and
there he could see churches that had not been burned. The Kremlin, which
was not destroyed, leamed white in the distance with its towers and the
belfry of Ivan the reat. The domes of the New Convent of the Virin
littered brihtly and its bells were rinin particularly clearly.
These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of the
Nativity of the Virin. But there seemed to be no one to celebrate this
holiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few Russians to be
seen were tattered and frihtened people who tried to hide when they saw
the French.

It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but in
place of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierre
unconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, French order had been
established over this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of the
soldiers who, marchin in reular ranks briskly and aily, were
escortin him and the other criminals; he felt it in the looks of an
important French official in a carriae and pair driven by a soldier,
whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds of reimental
music he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized it
especially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read out
when he came that mornin. Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiers
and led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,
and it seemed that they miht have forotten him, or confused him with
the others. But no: the answers he had iven when questioned had come
back to him in his desination as "the man who does not ive his name,"
and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were
now leadin him somewhere with unhesitatin assurance on their faces
that he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted
and that they were bein taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself
to be an insinificant chip fallen amon the wheels of a machine whose
action he did not understand but which was workin well.

He and the other prisoners were taken to the riht side of the Virin's
Field, to a lare white house with an immense arden not far from the
convent. This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, where Pierre had often
been in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of the
soldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmuhl (Davout).

They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.
Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted throuh a lass allery,
an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a lon low
study at the door of which stood an adjutant.

Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end of
the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consultin
a paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raisin his eyes,
he said in a low voice:

"Who are you?"

Pierre was silent because he was incapable of utterin a word. To him
Davout was not merely a French eneral, but a man notorious for his
cruelty. Lookin at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmaster
who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that every
instant of delay miht cost him his life; but he did not know what to
say. He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his first
examination, yet to disclose his rank and position was danerous and
embarrassin. So he was silent. But before he had decided what to do,
Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,
screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him.

"I know that man," he said in a cold, measured tone, evidently
calculated to frihten Pierre.

The chill that had been runnin down Pierre's back now seized his head
as in a vise.

"You cannot know me, eneral, I have never seen you..."

"He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressin another eneral
who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.

Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierre
rapidly bean:

"No, monseineur," he said, suddenly rememberin that Davout was a duke.
"No, monseineur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer and
have not quitted Moscow."

"Your name?" asked Davout.

"Bezukhov."

"What proof have I that you are not lyin?"

"Monseineur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleadin
voice.

Davout looked up and azed intently at him. For some seconds they looked
at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of war
and law, that look established human relations between the two men. At
that moment an immense number of thins passed dimly throuh both their
minds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity and
were brothers.

At the first lance, when Davout had only raised his head from the
papers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierre
was merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him without
burdenin his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him a
human bein. He reflected for a moment.

"How can you show me that you are tellin the truth?" said Davout
coldly.

Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his reiment and the
street where the house was.

"You are not what you say," returned Davout.

In a tremblin, falterin voice Pierre bean adducin proofs of the
truth of his statements.

But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported somethin to Davout.

Davout brihtened up at the news the adjutant brouht, and bean
buttonin up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forotten Pierre.

When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head in
Pierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. But
where they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach house
or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him as
they crossed the Virin's Field.

He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was puttin another
question to Davout.

"Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant, Pierre did
not know.

Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, or
in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied,
and noticin nothin around him went on movin his les as the others
did till they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thouht in his
mind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him to
death? Not the men on the commission that had first examined him--not
one of them wished to or, evidently, could have done it. It was not
Davout, who had looked at him in so human a way. In another moment
Davout would have realized that he was doin wron, but just then the
adjutant had come in and interrupted him. The adjutant, also, had
evidently had no evil intent thouh he miht have refrained from comin
in. Then who was executin him, killin him, deprivin him of life--him,
Pierre, with all his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thouhts? Who was
doin this? And Pierre felt that it was no one.

It was a system--a concurrence of circumstances.

A system of some sort was killin him--Pierre--deprivin him of life, of
everythin, annihilatin him.




CHAPTER XI

From Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straiht down the
Virin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen arden
in which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pit had been
du in the round, and near the post and the pit a lare crowd stood in
a semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many of
Napoleon's soldiers who were not on duty--ermans, Italians, and
Frenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the riht and left of the post
stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and hih
boots and shakos.

The prisoners were placed in a certain order, accordin to the list
(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenly
bean to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as if
part of his soul had been torn away. He lost the power of thinkin or
understandin. He could only hear and see. And he had only one wish--
that the frihtful thin that had to happen should happen quickly.
Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.

The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin,
the other dark, shay, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was a
domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with rizzled hair and a
plump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsome
man with a broad, liht-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was a
factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eihteen in a loose coat.

Pierre heard the French consultin whether to shoot them separately or
two at a time. "In couples," replied the officer in command in a calm
voice. There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evident
that they were all hurryin--not as men hurry to do somethin they
understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant and
incomprehensible task.

A French official wearin a scarf came up to the riht of the row of
prisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.

Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at the
officer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. The
convicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were bein
brouht, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approachin
huntsman. One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his back
and made a movement of the lips resemblin a smile. With hurried hands
the soldiers blindfolded them, drawin the sacks over their heads, and
bound them to the post.

Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firm
reular tread and halted eiht paces from the post. Pierre turned away
to avoid seein what was oin to happen. Suddenly a cracklin, rollin
noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrific
thunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmen
were doin somethin near the pit, with pale faces and tremblin hands.
Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,
these two lanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal for
protection in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe what
was oin to happen to them. They could not believe it because they
alone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understood
nor believed that it could be taken from them.

Aain Pierre did not wish to look and aain turned away; but aain the
sound as of a frihtful explosion struck his ear, and at the same moment
he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen who
were aain doin somethin by the post, their tremblin hands impedin
one another. Pierre, breathin heavily, looked around as if askin what
it meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.

On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officers
without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict that
were in his own heart. "But who, after all, is doin this? They are all
sufferin as I am. Who then is it? Who?" flashed for an instant throuh
his mind.

"Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!" shouted someone. The fifth
prisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away--alone. Pierre did not
understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been brouht
there only to witness the execution. With ever-rowin horror, and no
sense of joy or relief, he azed at what was takin place. The fifth man
was the factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands on
him he spran aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shuddered
and shook himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They draed him
alon, holdin him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they ot him
to the post he rew quiet, as if he suddenly understood somethin.
Whether he understood that screamin was useless or whether he thouht
it incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand at
the post, waitin to be blindfolded like the others, and like a wounded
animal looked around him with litterin eyes.

Pierre was no loner able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosity
and aitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the hihest pitch
at this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; he
wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.

When they bean to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurt
the back of his head; then when they propped him aainst the
bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not bein comfortable in that
position, straihtened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back aain
more comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not miss
his slihtest movement.

Probably a word of command was iven and was followed by the reports of
eiht muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards remember
havin heard the slihtest sound of the shots. He only saw how the
workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showed
itself in two places, how the ropes slackened under the weiht of the
hanin body, and how the workman sat down, his head hanin unnaturally
and one le bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hindered
him. Pale, frihtened people were doin somethin around the workman.
The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as he
untied the ropes. The body collapsed. The soldiers draed it awkwardly
from the post and bean pushin it into the pit.

They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who must
hide the traces of their uilt as quickly as possible.

Pierre lanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lyin with
his knees close up to his head and one shoulder hiher than the other.
That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefuls
of earth were already bein thrown over the whole body. One of the
soldiers, evidently sufferin, shouted ruffly and anrily at Pierre to
o back. But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post,
and no one drove him away.

When the pit had been filled up a command was iven. Pierre was taken
back to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of the post made
a half turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-four
sharpshooters with dischared muskets, standin in the center of the
circle, ran back to their places as the companies passed by.

Pierre azed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran in
couples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. This
one, a youn soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, and
his musket restin on the round, still stood near the pit at the spot
from which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, takin some steps
forward and back to save himself from fallin. An old, noncommissioned
officer ran out of the ranks and takin him by the elbow draed him to
his company. The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen bean to disperse. They
all went away silently and with droopin heads.

"That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.

Pierre lanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier who
was tryin to find some relief after what had been done, but was not
able to do so. Without finishin what he had beun to say he made a
hopeless movement with his arm and went away.




CHAPTER XII

After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners
and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.

Toward evenin a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers and
told him that he had been pardoned and would now o to the barracks for
the prisoners of war. Without understandin what was said to him, Pierre
ot up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of the
field, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams, and
battens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twenty
different men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understandin
who they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heard
what they said, but did not understand the meanin of the words and made
no kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied to
questions they put to him, but did not consider who was listenin to his
replies, nor how they would understand them. He looked at their faces
and fiures, but they all seemed to him equally meaninless.

From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed by
men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainsprin of his
life, on which everythin depended and which made everythin appear
alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everythin had collapsed into
a heap of meaninless rubbish. Thouh he did not acknowlede it to
himself, his faith in the riht orderin of the universe, in humanity,
in his own soul, and in od, had been destroyed. He had experienced this
before, but never so stronly as now. When similar doubts had assailed
him before, they had been the result of his own wrondoin, and at the
bottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and from
those doubts was to be found within himself. But now he felt that the
universe had crumbled before his eyes and only meaninless ruins
remained, and this not by any fault of his own. He felt that it was not
in his power to reain faith in the meanin of life.

Around him in the darkness men were standin and evidently somethin
about him interested them reatly. They were tellin him somethin and
askin him somethin. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last he
found himself in a corner of the shed amon men who were lauhin and
talkin on all sides.

"Well, then, mates... that very prince who..." some voice at the other
end of the shed was sayin, with a stron emphasis on the word who.

Sittin silent and motionless on a heap of straw aainst the wall,
Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soon as he
closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad--
especially dreadful because of its simplicity--and the faces of the
murderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And he opened
his eyes aain and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.

Beside him in a stoopin position sat a small man of whose presence he
was first made aware by a stron smell of perspiration which came from
him every time he moved. This man was doin somethin to his les in the
darkness, and thouh Pierre could not see his face he felt that the man
continually lanced at him. On rowin used to the darkness Pierre saw
that the man was takin off his le bands, and the way he did it aroused
Pierre's interest.

Havin unwound the strin that tied the band on one le, he carefully
coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other le, lancin up
at Pierre. While one hand hun up the first strin the other was already
unwindin the band on the second le. In this way, havin carefully
removed the le bands by deft circular motions of his arm followin one
another uninterruptedly, the man hun the le bands up on some pes
fixed above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut somethin, closed
the knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seatin himself
comfortably, clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyes
on Pierre. The latter was conscious of somethin pleasant, comfortin,
and well-rounded in these deft movements, in the man's well-ordered
arranements in his corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at
the man without takin his eyes from him.

"You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenly said.

And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his sinson voice
that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tears
risin to his eyes. The little fellow, ivin Pierre no time to betray
his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:

"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender sinson caressin voice
old Russian peasant women employ. "Don't fret, friend--'suffer an hour,
live for an ae!' that's how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,
thank heaven, without offense. Amon these folk, too, there are ood men
as well as bad," said he, and still speakin, he turned on his knees
with a supple movement, ot up, couhed, and went off to another part of
the shed.

"Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice sayin at the other
end of the shed. "So you've come, you rascal? She remembers... Now, now,
that'll do!"

And the soldier, pushin away a little do that was jumpin up at him,
returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had somethin
wrapped in a ra.

"Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resumin his former respectful tone as
he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. "We had soup for
dinner and the potatoes are rand!"

Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemed
extremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and bean to eat.

"Well, are they all riht?" said the soldier with a smile. "You should
do like this."

He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into two
equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from the
ra, and handed it to Pierre.

"The potatoes are rand!" he said once more. "Eat some like that!"

Pierre thouht he had never eaten anythin that tasted better.

"Oh, I'm all riht," said he, "but why did they shoot those poor
fellows? The last one was hardly twenty."

"Tss, tt...!" said the little man. "Ah, what a sin... what a sin!" he
added quickly, and as if his words were always waitin ready in his
mouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, that you
stayed in Moscow?"

"I didn't think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally," replied
Pierre.

"And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?"

"No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and tried
me as an incendiary."

"Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man.

"And have you been here lon?" Pierre asked as he munched the last of
the potato.

"I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow."

"Why, are you a soldier then?"

"Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron reiment. I was dyin of fever. We
weren't told anythin. There were some twenty of us lyin there. We had
no idea, never uessed at all."

"And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired.

"How can one help it, lad? My name is Platon, and the surname is
Karataev," he added, evidently wishin to make it easier for Pierre to
address him. "They call me 'little falcon' in the reiment. How is one
to help feelin sad? Moscow--she's the mother of cities. How can one see
all this and not feel sad? But 'the maot naws the cabbae, yet dies
first'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," he added rapidly.

"What? What did you say?" asked Pierre.

"Who? I?" said Karataev. "I say thins happen not as we plan but as od
judes," he replied, thinkin that he was repeatin what he had said
before, and immediately continued:

"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you have
abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they still
livin?" he asked.

And thouh it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressed
smile of kindliness puckered the soldier's lips as he put these
questions. He seemed rieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
he had no mother.

"A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's none as
dear as one's own mother!" said he. "Well, and have you little ones?" he
went on askin.

Aain Pierre's neative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastened
to add:

"Never mind! You're youn folks yet, and please od may still have some.
The reat thin is to live in harmony...."

"But it's all the same now," Pierre could not help sayin.

"Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prison or a
bear's sack!"

He seated himself more comfortably and couhed, evidently preparin to
tell a lon story.

"Well, my dear fellow, I was still livin at home," he bean. "We had a
well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and our
house was one to thank od for. When Father and we went out mowin there
were seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It so
happened..."

And Platon Karataev told a lon story of how he had one into someone's
copse to take wood, how he had been cauht by the keeper, had been
tried, floed, and sent to serve as a soldier.

"Well, lad," and a smile chaned the tone of his voice "we thouht it
was a misfortune but it turned out a blessin! If it had not been for my
sin, my brother would have had to o as a soldier. But he, my youner
brother, had five little ones, while I, you see, only left a wife
behind. We had a little irl, but od took her before I went as a
soldier. I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look and
see that they are livin better than before. The yard full of cattle,
the women at home, two brothers away earnin waes, and only Michael the
younest, at home. Father, he says, 'All my children are the same to me:
it hurts the same whichever finer ets bitten. But if Platon hadn't
been shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had to o.' called us all
to him and, will you believe it, placed us in front of the icons.
'Michael,' he says, 'come here and bow down to his feet; and you, youn
woman, you bow down too; and you, randchildren, also bow down before
him! Do you understand?' he says. That's how it is, dear fellow. Fate
looks for a head. But we are always judin, 'that's not well--that's
not riht!' Our luck is like water in a dranet: you pull at it and it
bules, but when you've drawn it out it's empty! That's how it is."

And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.

After a short silence he rose.

"Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and bean rapidly crossin
himself and repeatin:

"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus
Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, have
mercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the round, ot
up, sihed, and sat down aain on his heap of straw. "That's the way.
Lay me down like a stone, O od, and raise me up like a loaf," he
muttered as he lay down, pullin his coat over him.

"What prayer was that you were sayin?" asked Pierre.

"Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep. "What was I sayin?
I was prayin. Don't you pray?"

"Yes, I do," said Pierre. "But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?"

"Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints. One must
pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you've curled up and ot warm,
you dauhter of a bitch!" said Karataev, touchin the do that lay at
his feet, and aain turnin over he fell asleep immediately.

Sounds of cryin and screamin came from somewhere in the distance
outside, and flames were visible throuh the cracks of the shed, but
inside it was quiet and dark. For a lon time Pierre did not sleep, but
lay with eyes open in the darkness, listenin to the reular snorin of
Platon who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had been
shattered was once more stirrin in his soul with a new beauty and on
new and unshakable foundations.




CHAPTER XIII

Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confined
in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained for
four weeks.

When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty fiures to
him except Platon Karataev, who always remained in his mind a most vivid
and precious memory and the personification of everythin Russian,
kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neihbor next mornin at dawn the
first impression of him, as of somethin round, was fully confirmed:
Platon's whole fiure--in a French overcoat irdled with a cord, a
soldier's cap, and bast shoes--was round. His head was quite round, his
back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if ever
ready to embrace somethin, were rounded, his pleasant smile and his
lare, entle brown eyes were also round.

Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judin by his stories of
campains he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himself
know his ae and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantly
white, stron teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when he
lauhed--as he often did--were all sound and ood, there was not a ray
hair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body ave an impression
of suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.

His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression of
innocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chief
peculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It was
evident that he never considered what he had said or was oin to say,
and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had an
irresistible persuasiveness.

His physical strenth and aility durin the first days of his
imprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatiue and
sickness meant. Every niht before lyin down, he said: "Lord, lay me
down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every mornin on ettin
up, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I et up and shake myself." And
indeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he only
had to shake himself, to be ready without a moment's delay for some
work, just as children are ready to play directly they awake. He could
do everythin, not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed,
planed, and mended boots. He was always busy, and only at niht allowed
himself conversation--of which he was fond--and sons. He did not sin
like a trained siner who knows he is listened to, but like the birds,
evidently ivin vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretches
oneself or walks about to et rid of stiffness, and the sounds were
always hih-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and his
face at such times was very serious.

Havin been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to row, he seemed to
have thrown off all that had been forced upon him--everythin military
and alien to himself--and had returned to his former peasant habits.

"A soldier on leave--a shirt outside breeches," he would say.

He did not like talkin about his life as a soldier, thouh he did not
complain, and often mentioned that he had not been floed once durin
the whole of his army service. When he related anythin it was enerally
some old and evidently precious memory of his "Christian" life, as he
called his peasant existence. The proverbs, of which his talk was full,
were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ,
but those folk sayins which taken without a context seem so
insinificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a sinificance
of profound wisdom.

He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previous
occasion, yet both would be riht. He liked to talk and he talked well,
adornin his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayins which
Pierre thouht he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk lay
in the fact that the commonest events--sometimes just such as Pierre had
witnessed without takin notice of them--assumed in Karataev's a
character of solemn fitness. He liked to hear the folk tales one of the
soldiers used to tell of an evenin (they were always the same), but
most of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smile
joyfully when listenin to such stories, now and then puttin in a word
or askin a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clear
to himself. Karataev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre
understood them, but loved and lived affectionately with everythin life
brouht him in contact with, particularly with man--not any particular
man, but those with whom he happened to be. He loved his do, his
comrades, the French, and Pierre who was his neihbor, but Pierre felt
that in spite of Karataev's affectionate tenderness for him (by which he
unconsciously ave Pierre's spiritual life its due) he would not have
rieved for a moment at partin from him. And Pierre bean to feel in
the same way toward Karataev.

To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinary
soldier. They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed him
ood-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he always
remained what he had seemed that first niht: an unfathomable, rounded,
eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.

Platon Karataev knew nothin by heart except his prayers. When he bean
to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.

Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meanin of his words, would ask him to
repeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said a moment
before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of his
favorite son: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred in
it, but when spoken and not sun, no meanin could be ot out of it. He
did not, and could not, understand the meanin of words apart from their
context. Every word and action of his was the manifestation of an
activity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as he
rearded it, had no meanin as a separate thin. It had meanin only as
part of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words and actions
flowed from him as evenly, inevitably, and spontaneously as frarance
exhales from a flower. He could not understand the value or sinificance
of any word or deed taken separately.




CHAPTER XIV

When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
Rostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to o there, in spite of her
aunt's efforts to dissuade her--and not merely to o herself but to take
her nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy, possible or
impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty,
not only to herself, to be near her brother who was perhaps dyin, but
to do everythin possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared to
set off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, Princess
Mary attributed to his bein too weak to write or to his considerin the
lon journey too hard and too danerous for her and his son.

In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipaes were the
hue family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, a semiopen
trap, and a baae cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,
little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tikhon, and a
youn footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.

The usual route throuh Moscow could not be thouht of, and the
roundabout way Princess Mary was oblied to take throuh Lipetsk,
Ryazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very lon and, as post horses were not
everywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where the French
were said to have shown themselves was even danerous.

Durin this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, and
Princess Mary's servants were astonished at her enery and firmness of
spirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and no
difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and enery, which
infected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslavl by the end of
the second week.

The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life.
Her love for Rostov no loner tormented or aitated her. It filled her
whole soul, had become an interal part of herself, and she no loner
struled aainst it. Latterly she had become convinced that she loved
and was beloved, thouh she never said this definitely to herself in
words. She had become convinced of it at her last interview with
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
Rostovs. Not by a sinle word had Nicholas alluded to the fact that
Prince Andrew's relations with Natasha miht, if he recovered, be
renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thouht of
this.

Yet in spite of that, his relation to her--considerate, delicate, and
lovin--not only remained unchaned, but it sometimes seemed to Princess
Mary that he was even lad that the family connection between them
allowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knew that she
loved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she was
beloved, and was happy in reard to it.

But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not prevent
her feelin rief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, that
spiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for her
to ive full play to her feelin for her brother. That feelin was so
stron at the moment of leavin Voronezh that those who saw her off, as
they looked at her careworn, despairin face, felt sure she would fall
ill on the journey. But the very difficulties and preoccupations of the
journey, which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while from
her rief and ave her strenth.

As always happens when travelin, Princess Mary thouht only of the
journey itself, forettin its object. But as she approached Yaroslavl
the thouht of what miht await her there--not after many days, but that
very evenin--aain presented itself to her and her aitation increased
to its utmost limit.

The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where the
Rostovs were stayin in Yaroslavl, and in what condition Prince Andrew
was, when he met the bi coach just enterin the town ates was appalled
by the terrible pallor of the princess' face that looked out at him from
the window.

"I have found out everythin, your excellency: the Rostovs are stayin
at the merchant Bronnikov's house, in the Square not far from here,
riht above the Vola," said the courier.

Princess Mary looked at him with frihtened inquiry, not understandin
why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was her
brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.

"How is the prince?" she asked.

"His excellency is stayin in the same house with them."

"Then he is alive," thouht Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:
"How is he?"

"The servants say he is still the same."

What "still the same" miht mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with an
unnoticed lance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sittin in
front of her lookin with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head and
did not raise it aain till the heavy coach, rumblin, shakin and
swayin, came to a stop. The carriae steps clattered as they were let
down.

The carriae door was opened. On the left there was water--a reat
river--and on the riht a porch. There were people at the entrance:
servants, and a rosy irl with a lare plait of black hair, smilin as
it seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This was
Sonya.) Princess Mary ran up the steps. "This way, this way!" said the
irl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself in
the hall facin an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly to
meet her with a look of emotion. This was the countess. She embraced
Princess Mary and kissed her.

"Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuis
lontemps." *


* "My child! I love you and have known you a lon time."


Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was the
countess and that it was necessary to say somethin to her. Hardly
knowin how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases in
French in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, and
asked: "How is he?"

"The doctor says that he is not in daner," said the countess, but as
she spoke she raised her eyes with a sih, and her esture conveyed a
contradiction of her words.

"Where is he? Can I see him--can I?" asked the princess.

"One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" said the
countess, turnin to little Nicholas who was comin in with Dessalles.
"There will be room for everybody, this is a bi house. Oh, what a
lovely boy!"

The countess took Princess Mary into the drawin room, where Sonya was
talkin to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed the boy, and
the old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had chaned very
much since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk,
cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewildered
person. While talkin to Princess Mary he continually looked round as if
askin everyone whether he was doin the riht thin. After the
destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomed
roove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own sinificance and to
feel that there was no loner a place for him in life.

In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, and
her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him they
should be tryin to entertain her and pretendin to admire her nephew,
the princess noticed all that was oin on around her and felt the
necessity of submittin, for a time, to this new order of thins which
she had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and thouh it was hard for
her she was not vexed with these people.

"This is my niece," said the count, introducin Sonya--"You don't know
her, Princess?"

Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, tryin to stifle the hostile feelin
that arose in her toward the irl, she kissed her. But she felt
oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so far
from what was in her own heart.

"Where is he?" she asked aain, addressin them all.

"He is downstairs. Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushin. "We
have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess."

Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes. She turned
away and was about to ask the countess aain how to o to him, when
liht, impetuous, and seeminly buoyant steps were heard at the door.
The princess looked round and saw Natasha comin in, almost runnin--
that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meetin in Moscow
lon since.

But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before she realized
that here was a real comrade in her rief, and consequently a friend.
She ran to meet her, embraced her, and bean to cry on her shoulder.

As soon as Natasha, sittin at the head of Prince Andrew's bed, heard of
Princess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to her
with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.

There was only one expression on her aitated face when she ran into the
drawin room--that of love--boundless love for him, for her, and for all
that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, sufferin for others,
and passionate desire to ive herself entirely to helpin them. It was
plain that at that moment there was in Natasha's heart no thouht of
herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.

Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at the
first lance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowful
pleasure.

"Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leadin her into the other
room.

Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natasha.
She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learn
everythin.

"How..." she bean her question but stopped short.

She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.
Natasha's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly and
profoundly.

Natasha was azin at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to say
all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyes
which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossible
not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natasha's lips
twitched, uly wrinkles athered round her mouth, and coverin her face
with her hands she burst into sobs.

Princess Mary understood.

But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:

"But how is his wound? What is his eneral condition?"

"You, you... will see," was all Natasha could say.

They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left off
cryin and were able to o to him with calm faces.

"How has his whole illness one? Is it lon since he rew worse? When
did this happen?" Princess Mary inquired.

Natasha told her that at first there had been daner from his feverish
condition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that had passed and
the doctor had only been afraid of anrene. That daner had also
passed. When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had beun to fester
(Natasha knew all about such thins as festerin) and the doctor had
said that the festerin miht take a normal course. Then fever set in,
but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious.

"But two days ao this suddenly happened," said Natasha, strulin with
her sobs. "I don't know why, but you will see what he is like."

"Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess.

"No, it's not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too ood, he
cannot, cannot live, because..."




CHAPTER XV

When Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movement and
let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt the
sobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and now
tried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look at
him without tears.

The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "two days
ao this suddenly happened." She understood those words to mean that he
had suddenly softened and that this softenin and entleness were sins
of approachin death. As she stepped to the door she already saw in
imaination Andrew's face as she remembered it in childhood, a entle,
mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown, and which therefore
affected her very stronly. She was sure he would speak soft, tender
words to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and that
she would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in his
presence. Yet sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobs
rose hiher and hiher in her throat as she more and more clearly
distinuished his form and her shortsihted eyes tried to make out his
features, and then she saw his face and met his aze.

He was lyin in a squirrel-fur dressin own on a divan, surrounded by
pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand he
held a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicate
mustache he had rown, movin his finers slowly. His eyes azed at them
as they entered.

On seein his face and meetin his eyes Princess Mary's pace suddenly
slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. She suddenly
felt uilty and rew timid on catchin the expression of his face and
eyes.

"But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself. And his cold, stern look
replied: "Because you are alive and thinkin of the livin, while I..."

In the deep aze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there was
an almost hostile expression as he slowly rearded his sister and
Natasha.

He kissed his sister, holdin her hand in his as was their wont.

"How are you, Mary? How did you manae to et here?" said he in a voice
as calm and aloof as his look.

Had he screamed in aony, that scream would not have struck such horror
into Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice.

"And have you brouht little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow, quiet
manner and with an obvious effort to remember.

"How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she was
sayin.

"That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and aain makin
an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (his
words clearly did not correspond to his thouhts):

"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue." *


* "Thank you for comin, my dear."

Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince just
perceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She now
understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, his
tone, and especially in that calm, almost antaonistic look could be
felt an estranement from everythin belonin to this world, terrible
in one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understand
anythin livin; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, not
because he lacked the power to do so but because he understood somethin
else--somethin the livin did not and could not understand--and which
wholly occupied his mind.

"There, you see how stranely fate has brouht us toether," said he,
breakin the silence and pointin to Natasha. "She looks after me all
the time."

Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such a
thin. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,
before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live he
could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he had
not known that he was dyin, how could he have failed to pity her and
how could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation was
that he was indifferent, because somethin else, much more important,
had been revealed to him.

The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off.

"Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.

Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and only
after callin her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself.

"Really?" he asked.

"They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that..."

Natasha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he was
makin an effort to listen, but could not do so.

"Yes, they say it's burned," he said. "It's a reat pity," and he azed
straiht before him, absently strokin his mustache with his finers.

"And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?" Prince Andrew suddenly said,
evidently wishin to speak pleasantly to them. "He wrote here that he
took a reat likin to you," he went on simply and calmly, evidently
unable to understand all the complex sinificance his words had for
livin people. "If you liked him too, it would be a ood thin for you
to et married," he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at havin
found words he had lon been seekin.

Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meanin for her, except as
a proof of how far away he now was from everythin livin.

"Why talk of me?" she said quietly and lanced at Natasha.

Natasha, who felt her lance, did not look at her. All three were aain
silent.

"Andrew, would you like..." Princess Mary suddenly said in a tremblin
voice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talkin
about you!"

Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, but
Princess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he did
not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, entle
irony because he thouht she was tryin what she believed to be the last
means of arousin him.

"Yes, I shall be very lad to see him. Is he quite well?"

When little Nicholas was brouht into Prince Andrew's room he looked at
his father with frihtened eyes, but did not cry, because no one else
was cryin. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what to
say to him.

When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary aain went up to her
brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any loner bean
to cry.

He looked at her attentively.

"Is it about Nicholas?" he asked.

Princess Mary nodded her head, weepin.

"Mary, you know the osp..." but he broke off.

"What did you say?"

"Nothin. You mustn't cry here," he said, lookin at her with the same
cold expression.

When Princess Mary bean to cry, he understood that she was cryin at
the thouht that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With a
reat effort he tried to return to life and to see thins from their
point of view.

"Yes, to them it must seem sad!" he thouht. "But how simple it is.

"The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Father
feedeth them," he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary;
"but no, they will take it their own way, they won't understand! They
can't understand that all those feelins they prize so--all our
feelins, all those ideas that seem so important to us, are unnecessary.
We cannot understand one another," and he remained silent.

Prince Andrew's little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
nothin. After that day he lived throuh many thins, ainin knowlede,
observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties he
afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profound
understandin of the meanin of the scene he had witnessed between his
father, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then. He understood it
completely, and, leavin the room without cryin, went silently up to
Natasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with his
beautiful, thouhtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembled
and leanin his head aainst her he bean to cry.

After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him and
either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natasha of whom
he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clun to them quietly and
shyly.

When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood what
Natasha's face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natasha of
hopes of savin his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, and
did not cry any more, but prayed continually, turnin in soul to that
Eternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dyin man was now so
evident.




CHAPTER XVI

Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he was
dyin and was already half dead. He was conscious of an aloofness from
everythin earthly and a strane and joyous lihtness of existence.
Without haste or aitation he awaited what was comin. That inexorable,
eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had felt
continually all his life--was now near to him and, by the strane
lihtness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable...


Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terribly
tormentin fear of death--the end--but now he no loner understood that
fear.

He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top before
him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky, and
knew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself after
bein wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had instantly
unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondae of life that
had restrained it, he no loner feared death and ceased to think about
it.

Durin the hours of solitude, sufferin, and partial delirium he spent
after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the new
principle of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciously
detached himself from earthly life. To love everythin and everybody and
always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not to
live this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with that
principle of love, the more he renounced life and the more completely he
destroyed that dreadful barrier which--in the absence of such love--
stands between life and death. When durin those first days he
remembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well, what of
it? So much the better!"

But after the niht in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seen her
for whom he loned appear before him and, havin pressed her hand to his
lips, had shed entle, happy tears, love for a particular woman aain
crept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. And
joyful and aitatin thouhts bean to occupy his mind. Recallin the
moment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kurain, he could not
now reain the feelin he then had, but was tormented by the question
whether Kurain was alive. And he dared not inquire.

His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natasha
referred to when she said: "This suddenly happened," had occurred two
days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual strule
between life and death, in which death ained the victory. It was the
unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life as
presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last, thouh
ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.

It was evenin. As usual after dinner he was slihtly feverish, and his
thouhts were preternaturally clear. Sonya was sittin by the table. He
bean to doze. Suddenly a feelin of happiness seized him.

"Ah, she has come!" thouht he.

And so it was: in Sonya's place sat Natasha who had just come in
noiselessly.

Since she had beun lookin after him, he had always experienced this
physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sittin in an armchair
placed sideways, screenin the liht of the candle from him, and was
knittin a stockin. She had learned to knit stockins since Prince
Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as old
nurses who knit stockins, and that there is somethin soothin in the
knittin of stockins. The needles clicked lihtly in her slender,
rapidly movin hands, and he could clearly see the thouhtful profile of
her droopin face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. She
started, lanced round at him, and screenin the candle with her hand
stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,
and reained her former position.

He looked at her without movin and saw that she wanted to draw a deep
breath after stoopin, but refrained from doin so and breathed
cautiously.

At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had told
her that if he lived he would always thank od for his wound which had
brouht them toether aain, but after that they never spoke of the
future.

"Can it or can it not be?" he now thouht as he looked at her and
listened to the liht click of the steel needles. "Can fate have brouht
me to her so stranely only for me to die?... Is it possible that the
truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent
my life in falsity? I love her more than anythin in the world! But what
am I to do if I love her?" he thouht, and he involuntarily roaned,
from a habit acquired durin his sufferins.

On hearin that sound Natasha put down the stockin, leaned nearer to
him, and suddenly, noticin his shinin eyes, stepped lihtly up to him
and bent over him.

"You are not asleep?"

"No, I have been lookin at you a lon time. I felt you come in. No one
else ives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that liht.
I want to weep for joy."

Natasha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.

"Natasha, I love you too much! More than anythin in the world."

"And I!"--She turned away for an instant. "Why too much?" she asked.

"Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, your
whole soul--shall I live? What do you think?"

"I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, takin hold of both his
hands with a passionate movement.

He remained silent awhile.

"How ood it would be!" and takin her hand he kissed it.

Natasha felt happy and aitated, but at once remembered that this would
not do and that he had to be quiet.

"But you have not slept," she said, repressin her joy. "Try to sleep...
please!"

He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and
sat down aain in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at
him, and her eyes met his beamin at her. She set herself a task on her
stockin and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.

Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep lon and
suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.

As he fell asleep he had still been thinkin of the subject that now
always occupied his mind--about life and death, and chiefly about death.
He felt himself nearer to it.

"Love? What is love?" he thouht.

"Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everythin that I understand, I
understand only because I love. Everythin is, everythin exists, only
because I love. Everythin is united by it alone. Love is od, and to
die means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the eneral and
eternal source." These thouhts seemed to him comfortin. But they were
only thouhts. Somethin was lackin in them, they were not clear, they
were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former
aitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.

He dreamed that he was lyin in the room he really was in, but that he
was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and
insinificant people appeared before him. He talked to them and
discussed somethin trivial. They were preparin to o away somewhere.
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had
more important cares, but he continued to speak, surprisin them by
empty witticisms. radually, unnoticed, all these persons bean to
disappear and a sinle question, that of the closed door, superseded all
else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everythin
depended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, and
tried to hurry, but his les refused to move and he knew he would not be
in time to lock the door thouh he painfully strained all his powers. He
was seized by an aonizin fear. And that fear was the fear of death. It
stood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creepin toward the
door, that dreadful somethin on the other side was already pressin
aainst it and forcin its way in. Somethin not human--death--was
breakin in throuh that door, and had to be kept out. He seized the
door, makin a final effort to hold it back--to lock it was no loner
possible--but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed from
behind by that terror, opened and closed aain.

Once aain it pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vain
and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it was
death, and Prince Andrew died.

But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,
and at the very instant he died, havin made an effort, he awoke.

"Yes, it was death! I died--and woke up. Yes, death is an awakenin!"
And all at once it rew liht in his soul and the veil that had till
then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He felt
as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and that
strane lihtness did not aain leave him.

When, wakin in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha went
up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at
her stranely, not understandin.

That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary's
arrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wastin fever
assumed a malinant character, but what the doctor said did not interest
Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more
convincin.

From that day an awakenin from life came to Prince Andrew toether with
his awakenin from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it did
not seem to him slower than an awakenin from sleep compared to the
duration of a dream.

There was nothin terrible or violent in this comparatively slow
awakenin.

His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Both
Princess Mary and Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did
not weep or shudder and durin these last days they themselves felt that
they were not attendin on him (he was no loner there, he had left
them) but on what reminded them most closely of him--his body. Both felt
this so stronly that the outward and terrible side of death did not
affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their rief.
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep, nor did they ever
talk to one another about him. They felt that they could not express in
words what they understood.

They both saw that he was sinkin slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,
away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that it
was riht.

He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave of
him. When they brouht his son to him, he pressed his lips to the boy's
and turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary and
Natasha understood that) but simply because he thouht it was all that
was required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he did
what was demanded and looked round as if askin whether there was
anythin else he should do.

When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leavin,
occurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present.

"Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes
lain motionless, rowin cold before them. Natasha went up, looked at
the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did not
kiss them, but clun to that which reminded her most nearly of him--his
body.

"Where has he one? Where is he now?..."

When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,
everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept.

Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.
The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was no
more. The old count cried because he felt that before lon, he, too,
must take the same terrible step.

Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
personal rief; they wept with a reverent and softenin emotion which
had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the simple
and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their
presence.

BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812




CHAPTER I

Man's mind cannot rasp the causes of events in their completeness, but
the desire to find those causes is implanted in man's soul. And without
considerin the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one of
which taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at the
first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelliible and says:
"This is the cause!" In historical events (where the actions of men are
the subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximation
to present itself was the will of the ods and, after that, the will of
those who stood in the most prominent position--the heroes of history.
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event--which
lies in the activity of the eneral mass of men who take part in it--to
be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the
actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem to
be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meanin of
historical events this way or that; yet there is the same difference
between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East
because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because
it had to happen, as there is between those who declared that the earth
was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who
admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth, but knew there
were laws directin its movement and that of the other planets. There
is, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause of
all causes. But there are laws directin events, and some of these laws
are known to us while we are conscious of others we cannot comprehend.
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite
abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,
just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was
possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the
earth.

The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and the
occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the most
important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian
army from the Ryazana to the Kalua road and to the Tarutino camp--the
so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River. They ascribe the
lory of that achievement of enius to different men and dispute as to
whom the honor is due. Even forein historians, includin the French,
acknowlede the enius of the Russian commanders when they speak of that
flank march. But it is hard to understand why military writers, and
followin them others, consider this flank march to be the profound
conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. In
the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and enius
of this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see that
the best position for an army when it is not bein attacked is where
there are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have
uessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow
in 1812 was on the Kalua road. So it is impossible to understand by
what reasonin the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver
was a profound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just why
they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy
the French; for this flank march, had it been preceded, accompanied, or
followed by other circumstances, miht have proved ruinous to the
Russians and salutary for the French. If the position of the Russian
army really bean to improve from the time of that march, it does not at
all follow that the march was the cause of it.

That flank march miht not only have failed to ive any advantae to the
Russian army, but miht in other circumstances have led to its
destruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? If
Murat had not lost siht of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remained
inactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had iven battle as
Bennisen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the French
attacked the Russians while they were marchin beyond the Pakhra? What
would have happened if on approachin Tarutino, Napoleon had attacked
the Russians with but a tenth of the enery he had shown when he
attacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had the French moved
on Petersbur?... In any of these eventualities the flank march that
brouht salvation miht have proved disastrous.

The third and most incomprehensible thin is that people studyin
history deliberately avoid seein that this flank march cannot be
attributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that in
reality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suest itself to anyone
in its entirety, but resulted--moment by moment, step by step, event by
event--from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only
seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and beloned to the
past.

At the council at Fili the prevailin thouht in the minds of the
Russian commanders was the one naturally suestin itself, namely, a
direct retreat by the Nizhni road. In proof of this there is the fact
that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above all
there is the well-known conversation after the council, between the
commander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in chare of the commissariat
department. Lanskoy informed the commander-in-chief that the army
supplies were for the most part stored alon the Oka in the Tula and
Ryazan provinces, and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would be
separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka, which cannot be
crossed early in winter. This was the first indication of the necessity
of deviatin from what had previously seemed the most natural course--a
direct retreat on Nizhni-Novorod. The army turned more to the south,
alon the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently the
inactivity of the French (who even lost siht of the Russian army),
concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula, and especially the
advantaes of drawin nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn
still further south to the Tula road. Havin crossed over, by a forced
march, to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra, the Russian commanders
intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thouht of the Tarutino
position; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French
troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects of
ivin battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kalua
province, oblied our army to turn still more to the south and to cross
from the Tula to the Kalua road and o to Tarutino, which was between
the roads alon which those supplies lay. Just as it is impossible to
say when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say
precisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarutino. Only
when the army had ot there, as the result of innumerable and varyin
forces, did people bein to assure themselves that they had desired this
movement and lon ao foreseen its result.




CHAPTER II

The famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after the advance of
the French had ceased, the Russian army, which had been continually
retreatin straiht back from the invaders, deviated from that direct
course and, not findin itself pursued, was naturally drawn toward the
district where supplies were abundant.

If instead of imainin to ourselves commanders of enius leadin the
Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could not
have done anythin but make a return movement toward Moscow, describin
an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where
the country was richest.

That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan, Tula, and Kalua roads was
so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction, and
demands were sent from Petersbur for Kutuzov to take his army that way.
At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from the
Emperor for havin moved his army alon the Ryazan road, and the
Emperor's letter indicated to him the very position he had already
occupied near Kalua.

Havin rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus iven by the
whole campain and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army--when the
strenth of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was received--
assumed the position natural to it.

Kutuzov's merit lay, not in any strateic maneuver of enius, as it is
called, but in the fact that he alone understood the sinificance of
what had happened. He alone then understood the meanin of the French
army's inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle of
Borodino had been a victory, he alone--who as commander-in-chief miht
have been expected to be eaer to attack--employed his whole strenth to
restrain the Russian army from useless enaements.

The beast wounded at Borodino was lyin where the fleein hunter had
left him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was stron and
merely lyin low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast was heard
to moan.

The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayed its
calamitous condition was the sendin of Lauriston to Kutuzov's camp with
overtures for peace.

Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was
riht, wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him, thouh
they were meaninless.

MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sendin one of my adjutants-eneral
to discuss several interestin questions with you. I be your Hihness
to credit what he says to you, especially when he expresses the
sentiment of esteem and special reard I have lon entertained for your
person. This letter havin no other object, I pray od, monsieur le
Prince Koutouzov, to keep you in His holy and racious protection!

NAPOLEON MOSCOW, OCTOBER 30, 1812

Kutuzov replied: "I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as
the initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the present spirit of
my nation." But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his
troops from attackin.

Durin the month that the French troops were pillain in Moscow and the
Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a chane had taken
place in the relative strenth of the two armies--both in spirit and in
number--as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian
side. Thouh the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown
to the Russians, as soon as that chane occurred the need of attackin
at once showed itself by countless sins. These sins were: Lauriston's
mission; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino; the reports comin in
from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French; the flow of
recruits to our reiments; the fine weather; the lon rest the Russian
soldiers had enjoyed, and the impatience to do what they had been
assembled for, which usually shows itself in an army that has been
restin; curiosity as to what the French army, so lon lost siht of,
was doin; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to
the French stationed at Tarutino; the news of easy successes ained by
peasants and uerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this;
the desire for revene that lay in the heart of every Russian as lon as
the French were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in every
soldier's mind that the relative strenth of the armies had chaned and
that the advantae was now on our side. There was a substantial chane
in the relative strenth, and an advance had become inevitable. And at
once, as a clock beins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand
has completed a full circle, this chane was shown by an increased
activity, whirrin, and chimin in the hiher spheres.




CHAPTER III

The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also by the
Emperor from Petersbur. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow
had been received in Petersbur, a detailed plan of the whole campain
had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his uidance. Thouh this plan
had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,
it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action. Kutuzov
only replied that movements arraned from a distance were always
difficult to execute. So fresh instructions were sent for the solution
of difficulties that miht be encountered, as well as fresh people who
were to watch Kutuzov's actions and report upon them.

Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was now reoranized.
The posts left vacant by Baration, who had been killed, and by Barclay,
who had one away in dudeon, had to be filled. Very serious
consideration was iven to the question whether it would be better to
put A in B's place and B in D's, or on the contrary to put D in A's
place, and so on--as if anythin more than A's or B's satisfaction
depended on this.

As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennisen, his Chief of
Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, and
these transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties was
oin on amon the staff of the army. A was underminin B, D was
underminin C, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.
In all these plottins the subject of intriue was enerally the conduct
of the war, which all these men believed they were directin; but this
affair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to o: that
is, never in the way people devised, but flowin always from the
essential attitude of the masses. Only in the hihest spheres did all
these schemes, crossins, and interminlins appear to be a true
reflection of what had to happen.

Prince Michael Ilarionovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second of October
in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino) Since
September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your last reports
were written on the twentieth, and durin all this time not only has no
action been taken aainst the enemy or for the relief of the ancient
capital, but accordin to your last report you have even retreated
farther. Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula
with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army, is in daner. From
eneral Wintzinerode's reports, I see that an enemy corps of ten
thousand men is movin on the Petersbur road. Another corps of several
thousand men is movin on Dmitrov. A third has advanced alon the
Vladimir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationed
between Ruza and Mozhaysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as the
twenty-fifth. In view of all this information, when the enemy has
scattered his forces in lare detachments, and with Napoleon and his
uards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy's forces confrontin you
are so considerable as not to allow of your takin the offensive? On the
contrary, he is probably pursuin you with detachments, or at most with
an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you. It would seem
that, availin yourself of these circumstances, you miht advantaeously
attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblie him to
retreat, retainin in our hands an important part of the provinces now
occupied by the enemy, and thereby avertin daner from Tula and other
towns in the interior. You will be responsible if the enemy is able to
direct a force of any size aainst Petersbur to threaten this capital
in which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with the
army entrusted to you, and actin with resolution and enery, you have
ample means to avert this fresh calamity. Remember that you have still
to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow. You have
experienced my readiness to reward you. That readiness will not weaken
in me, but I and Russia have a riht to expect from you all the zeal,
firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and the
courae of the troops you command justify us in expectin.

But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relation of the
forces had already made itself felt in Petersbur, was dispatched,
Kutuzov had found himself unable any loner to restrain the army he
commanded from attackin and a battle had taken place.

On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was out scoutin,
killed one hare and wounded another. Followin the wounded hare he made
his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat's
army, encamped there without any precautions. The Cossack lauhinly
told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French.
A cornet, hearin the story, informed his commander.

The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wished to
take advantae of this chance to capture some horses, but one of the
superior officers, who was acquainted with the hiher authorities,
reported the incident to a eneral on the staff. The state of thins on
the staff had of late been exceedinly strained. Ermolov had been to see
Bennisen a few days previously and had entreated him to use his
influence with the commander-in-chief to induce him to take the
offensive.

"If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are
askin for. I need only advise anythin and his Hihness is sure to do
the opposite," replied Bennisen.

The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out, was
the final proof that events had matured. The tihtly coiled sprin was
released, the clock bean to whirr and the chimes to play. Despite all
his supposed power, his intellect, his experience, and his knowlede of
men, Kutuzov--havin taken into consideration the Cossack's report, a
note from Bennisen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wishes
he supposed the Emperor to hold, and the fact that all the enerals
expressed the same wish--could no loner check the inevitable movement,
and ave the order to do what he rearded as useless and harmful--ave
his approval, that is, to the accomplished fact.




CHAPTER IV

Bennisen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flank of
the French was unuarded were merely final indications that it was
necessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth of October.

On the mornin of the fourth of October Kutuzov sined the dispositions.
Toll read them to Ermolov, askin him to attend to the further
arranements.

"All riht--all riht. I haven't time just now," replied Ermolov, and
left the hut.

The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very ood. As in the Austerlitz
dispositions, it was written--thouh not in erman this time:

"The First Column will march here and here," "the Second Column will
march there and there," and so on; and on paper, all these columns
arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.
Everythin had been admirably thouht out as is usual in dispositions,
and as is always the case, not a sinle column reached its place at the
appointed time.

When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been
prepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov to
deal with. A youn officer of the Horse uards, Kutuzov's orderly,
pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went to
Ermolov's quarters.

"one away," said Ermolov's orderly.

The officer of the Horse uards went to a eneral with whom Ermolov was
often to be found.

"No, and the eneral's out too."

The officer, mountin his horse, rode off to someone else.

"No, he's one out."

"If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What a nuisance
it is!" thouht the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. One man
said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other enerals, others said
he must have returned home. The officer searched till six o'clock in the
evenin without even stoppin to eat. Ermolov was nowhere to be found
and no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at a
comrade's, and rode aain to the vanuard to find Miloradovich.
Miloradovich too was away, but here he was told that he had one to a
ball at eneral Kikin's and that Ermolov was probably there too.

"But where is it?"

"Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointin to a
country house in the far distance.

"What, outside our line?"

"They've put two reiments as outposts, and they're havin such a spree
there, it's awful! Two bands and three sets of siners!"

The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino. While still at a
distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier's dance son
proceedin from the house.

"In the meadows... in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied by whistlin
and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts. These
sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that he
would be blamed for not havin executed sooner the important order
entrusted to him. It was already past eiht o'clock. He dismounted and
went up into the porch of a lare country house which had remained
intact between the Russian and French forces. In the refreshment room
and the hall, footmen were bustlin about with wine and viands. roups
of siners stood outside the windows. The officer was admitted and
immediately saw all the chief enerals of the army toether, and amon
them Ermolov's bi imposin fiure. They all had their coats unbuttoned
and were standin in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,
lauhin loudly. In the middle of the room a short handsome eneral with
a red face was dancin the trepak with much spirit and aility.

"Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"

The officer felt that by arrivin with important orders at such a moment
he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one of
the enerals espied him and, hearin what he had come about, informed
Ermolov.

Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearin what the
officer had to say, took the papers from him without a word.

"You think he went off just by chance?" said a comrade, who was on the
staff that evenin, to the officer of the Horse uards, referrin to
Ermolov. "It was a trick. It was done on purpose to et Konovnitsyn into
trouble. You'll see what a mess there'll be tomorrow."




CHAPTER V

Next day the decrepit Kutuzov, havin iven orders to be called early,
said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasant consciousness of
havin to direct a battle he did not approve of, ot into his caleche
and drove from Letashovka (a villae three and a half miles from
Tarutino) to the place where the attackin columns were to meet. He sat
in the caleche, dozin and wakin up by turns, and listenin for any
sound of firin on the riht as an indication that the action had beun.
But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumn mornin was just dawnin. On
approachin Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leadin their horses to
water across the road alon which he was drivin. Kutuzov looked at them
searchinly, stopped his carriae, and inquired what reiment they
beloned to. They beloned to a column that should have been far in
front and in ambush lon before then. "It may be a mistake," thouht the
old commander-in-chief. But a little further on he saw infantry
reiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,
eatin their rye porride and carryin fuel. He sent for an officer. The
officer reported that no order to advance had been received.

"How! Not rec..." Kutuzov bean, but checked himself immediately and
sent for a senior officer. ettin out of his caleche, he waited with
droopin head and breathin heavily, pacin silently up and down. When
Eykhen, the officer of the eneral staff whom he had summoned, appeared,
Kutuzov went purple in the face, not because that officer was to blame
for the mistake, but because he was an object of sufficient importance
for him to vent his wrath on. Tremblin and pantin the old man fell
into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the
round, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatenin him with his hands,
shoutin and loadin him with ross abuse. Another man, Captain Brozin,
who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame, suffered the
same fate.

"What sort of another blackuard are you? I'll have you shot!
Scoundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, wavin his arms and
reelin.

He was sufferin physically. He, the commander-in-chief, a Serene
Hihness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had
in Russia, to be placed in this position--made the lauhinstock of the
whole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to pray about today, or
have kept awake thinkin everythin over all niht," thouht he to
himself. "When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to
mock me so... and now!" He was in a state of physical sufferin as if
from corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressin it by cries of
aner and distress. But his strenth soon bean to fail him, and lookin
about him, conscious of havin said much that was amiss, he aain ot
into his caleche and drove back in silence.

His wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinkin feebly he
listened to excuses and self-justifications (Ermolov did not come to see
him till the next day) and to the insistence of Bennisen, Konovnitsyn,
and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next
day. And once more Kutuzov had to consent.




CHAPTER VI

Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evenin
and advanced durin the niht. It was an autumn niht with dark purple
clouds, but no rain. The round was damp but not muddy, and the troops
advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jinlin of the artillery
could be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talk out loud, to
smoke their pipes, or to strike a liht, and they tried to prevent their
horses neihin. The secrecy of the undertakin heihtened its charm and
they marched aily. Some columns, supposin they had reached their
destination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold round,
but the majority marched all niht and arrived at places where they
evidently should not have been.

Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least important
detachment of all) ot to his appointed place at the riht time. This
detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the path leadin from
the villae of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk.

Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by a
deserter from the French army bein brouht to him. This was a Polish
sereant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish that he had
come over because he had been slihted in the service: that he ouht
lon ao to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any of
them, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out. He said that
Murat was spendin the niht less than a mile from where they were, and
that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would
capture him alive. Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers.

The offer was too temptin to be refused. Everyone volunteered to o and
everybody advised makin the attempt. After much disputin and aruin,
Major-eneral rekov with two Cossack reiments decided to o with the
Polish sereant.

"Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sereant at partin,
"if you have been lyin I'll have you haned like a do; but if it's
true you shall have a hundred old pieces!"

Without replyin, the sereant, with a resolute air, mounted and rode
away with rekov whose men had quickly assembled. They disappeared into
the forest, and Count Orlov-Denisov, havin seen rekov off, returned,
shiverin from the freshness of the early dawn and excited by what he
had undertaken on his own responsibility, and bean lookin at the enemy
camp, now just visible in the deceptive liht of dawn and the dyin
campfires. Our columns ouht to have beun to appear on an open
declivity to his riht. He looked in that direction, but thouh the
columns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.
It seemed to the count that thins were beinnin to stir in the French
camp, and his keen-sihted adjutant confirmed this.

"Oh, it is really too late," said Count Orlov, lookin at the camp.

As often happens when someone we have trusted is no loner before our
eyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that the
sereant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russian
attack would be ruined by the absence of those two reiments, which he
would lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture a
commander-in-chief from amon such a mass of troops!

"I am sure that rascal was lyin," said the count.

"They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who like Count
Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy's
camp.

"Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them o on or not?"

"Will you have them fetched back?"

"Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with sudden
determination, lookin at his watch. "It will be too late. It is quite
liht."

And the adjutant alloped throuh the forest after rekov. When rekov
returned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandoned attempt and
by vainly awaitin the infantry columns that still did not appear, as
well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his men
felt the same excitement.

"Mount!" he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places and
crossed themselves.... "Forward, with od's aid!"

"Hurrah-ah-ah!" reverberated in the forest, and the Cossack companies,
trailin their lances and advancin one after another as if poured out
of a sack, dashed aily across the brook toward the camp.

One desperate, frihtened yell from the first French soldier who saw the
Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just wakin
up, ran off in all directions, abandonin cannons, muskets, and horses.

Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heedin what was behind and
around them, they would have captured Murat and everythin there. That
was what the officers desired. But it was impossible to make the
Cossacks bude when once they had ot booty and prisoners. None of them
listened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eiht uns were
taken on the spot, besides standards and (what seemed most important to
the Cossacks) horses, saddles, horsecloths, and the like. All this had
to be dealt with, the prisoners and uns secured, the booty divided--not
without some shoutin and even a little fihtin amon themselves--and
it was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.

The French, not bein farther pursued, bean to recover themselves: they
formed into detachments and bean firin. Orlov-Denisov, still waitin
for the other columns to arrive, advanced no further.

Meantime, accordin to the dispositions which said that "the First
Column will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,
commanded by Bennisen and directed by Toll, had started in due order
and, as always happens, had ot somewhere, but not to their appointed
places. As always happens the men, startin cheerfully, bean to halt;
murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally a
backward movement. Adjutants and enerals alloped about, shouted, rew
anry, quarreled, said they had come quite wron and were late, ave
vent to a little abuse, and at last ave it all up and went forward,
simply to et somewhere. "We shall et somewhere or other!" And they did
indeed et somewhere, thouh not to their riht places; a few eventually
even ot to their riht place, but too late to be of any use and only in
time to be fired at. Toll, who in this battle played the part of
Weyrother at Austerlitz, alloped assiduously from place to place,
findin everythin upside down everywhere. Thus he stumbled on Baovut's
corps in a wood when it was already broad dayliht, thouh the corps
should lon before have joined Orlov-Denisov. Excited and vexed by the
failure and supposin that someone must be responsible for it, Toll
alloped up to the commander of the corps and bean upbraidin him
severely, sayin that he ouht to be shot. eneral Baovut, a fihtin
old soldier of placid temperament, bein also upset by all the delay,
confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rae to everybody's surprise
and quite contrary to his usual character and said disareeable thins
to Toll.

"I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my men as
well as anybody," he said, and advanced with a sinle division.

Comin out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave eneral went
straiht ahead, leadin his men under fire, without considerin in his
aitation whether oin into action now, with a sinle division, would
be of any use or no. Daner, cannon balls, and bullets were just what he
needed in his anry mood. One of the first bullets killed him, and other
bullets killed many of his men. And his division remained under fire for
some time quite uselessly.




CHAPTER VII

Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front,
but Kutuzov accompanied that column. He well knew that nothin but
confusion would come of this battle undertaken aainst his will, and as
far as was in his power held the troops back. He did not advance.

He rode silently on his small ray horse, indolently answerin
suestions that they should attack.

"The word attack is always on your tonue, but you don't see that we are
unable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he to Miloradovich who
asked permission to advance.

"We couldn't take Murat prisoner this mornin or et to the place in
time, and nothin can be done now!" he replied to someone else.

When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear--where accordin to
the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody--there were
now two battalions of Poles, he ave a sidelon lance at Ermolov who
was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day.

"You see! They are askin to attack and makin plans of all kinds, but
as soon as one ets to business nothin is ready, and the enemy,
forewarned, takes measures accordinly."

Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearin these words.
He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and that Kutuzov
would content himself with that hint.

"He's havin a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly, nudin
with his knee Raevski who was at his side.

Soon after this, Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked:

"It is not too late yet, your Hihness--the enemy has not one away--if
you were to order an attack! If not, the uards will not so much as see
a little smoke."

Kutuzov did not reply, but when they reported to him that Murat's troops
were in retreat he ordered an advance, thouh at every hundred paces he
halted for three quarters of an hour.

The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov's Cossacks had done:
the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly.

In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration, and
Bennisen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others also
received pleasant reconitions correspondin to their various rades,
and followin the battle fresh chanes were made in the staff.

"That's how everythin is done with us, all topsy-turvy!" said the
Russian officers and enerals after the Tarutino battle, lettin it be
understood that some fool there is doin thins all wron but that we
ourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today. But
people who talk like that either do not know what they are talkin about
or deliberately deceive themselves. No battle--Tarutino, Borodino, or
Austerlitz--takes place as those who planned it anticipated. That is an
essential condition.

A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer than durin
a battle, where it is a question of life and death) influence the course
taken by the fiht, and that course never can be known in advance and
never coincides with the direction of any one force.

If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a iven
body, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any one of those
forces, but will always be a mean--what in mechanics is represented by
the diaonal of a paralleloram of forces.

If in the descriptions iven by historians, especially French ones, we
find their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previously
formed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptions
are false.

The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had in
view--to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by the
dispositions; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view--
to take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroyin the
whole corps, which Bennisen and others may have had in view; nor the
aim of the officer who wished to o into action to distinuish himself;
nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he ot, and so on.
But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all the
Russians of that day desired--to drive the French out of Russia and
destroy their army--it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino, just
because of its inconruities, was exactly what was wanted at that stae
of the campain. It would be difficult and even impossible to imaine
any result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle. With a
minimum of effort and insinificant losses, despite the reatest
confusion, the most important results of the whole campain were
attained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of the
weakness of the French, and the administration of that shock which
Napoleon's army had only awaited to bein its fliht.




CHAPTER VIII

Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; there
can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in the
hands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon their ancient
capital. Moscow, aboundin in provisions, arms, munitions, and
incalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands. The Russian army, only half
the strenth of the French, does not make a sinle attempt to attack for
a whole month. Napoleon's position is most brilliant. He can either fall
on the Russian army with double its strenth and destroy it; neotiate
an advantaeous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacin move on
Petersbur, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolensk or
Vilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special enius would seem to be
required to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time.
For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allow
the troops to loot, to prepare winter clothin--of which there was
sufficient in Moscow for the whole army--and methodically to collect the
provisions, of which (accordin to the French historians) there were
enouh in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon,
that reatest of all eniuses, who the historians declare had control of
the army, took none of these steps.

He not merely did nothin of the kind, but on the contrary he used his
power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open to
him. Of all that Napoleon miht have done: winterin in Moscow,
advancin on Petersbur or on Nizhni-Novorod, or retirin by a more
northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzov afterwards
took), nothin more stupid or disastrous can be imained than what he
actually did. He remained in Moscow till October, lettin the troops
plunder the city; then, hesitatin whether to leave a arrison behind
him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov without joinin battle,
turned to the riht and reached Malo-Yaroslavets, aain without
attemptin to break throuh and take the road Kutuzov took, but retirin
instead to Mozhaysk alon the devastated Smolensk road. Nothin more
stupid than that could have been devised, or more disastrous for the
army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon's aim been to destroy his army,
the most skillful strateist could hardly have devised any series of
actions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose,
independently of anythin the Russian army miht do.

Napoleon, the man of enius, did this! But to say that he destroyed his
army because he wished to, or because he was very stupid, would be as
unjust as to say that he had brouht his troops to Moscow because he
wished to and because he was very clever and a enius.

In both cases his personal activity, havin no more force than the
personal activity of any soldier, merely coincided with the laws that
uided the event.

The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon's faculties as havin
weakened in Moscow, and do so only because the results did not justify
his actions. He employed all his ability and strenth to do the best he
could for himself and his army, as he had done previously and as he did
subsequently in 1813. His activity at that time was no less astoundin
than it was in Eypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We do not
know for certain in how far his enius was enuine in Eypt--where forty
centuries looked down upon his randeur--for his reat exploits there
are all told us by Frenchmen. We cannot accurately estimate his enius
in Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from French
or erman sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps
without fihtin and of fortresses without a siee must incline ermans
to reconize his enius as the only explanation of the war carried on in
ermany. But we, thank od, have no need to reconize his enius in
order to hide our shame. We have paid for the riht to look at the
matter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that riht.

His activity in Moscow was as amazin and as full of enius as
elsewhere. Order after order and plan after plan were issued by him from
the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. The absence of
citizens and of a deputation, and even the burnin of Moscow, did not
disconcert him. He did not lose siht either of the welfare of his army
or of the doins of the enemy, or of the welfare of the people of
Russia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, or of diplomatic
considerations concernin the terms of the anticipated peace.




CHAPTER IX

With reard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry into
Moscow ave eneral Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements of
the Russian army, sent army corps out alon the different roads, and
chared Murat to find Kutuzov. Then he ave careful directions about the
fortification of the Kremlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a future
campain over the whole map of Russia.

With reard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captain Yakovlev,
who had been robbed and was in ras and did not know how to et out of
Moscow, minutely explained to him his whole policy and his mananimity,
and havin written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which he
considered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchin
had manaed affairs badly in Moscow, he dispatched Yakovlev to
Petersbur.

Havin similarly explained his views and his mananimity to Tutolmin, he
dispatched that old man also to Petersbur to neotiate.

With reard to leal matters, immediately after the fires he ave orders
to find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrel Rostopchin was
punished by an order to burn down his houses.

With reard to administrative matters, Moscow was ranted a
constitution. A municipality was established and the followin
announcement issued:

INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!

Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and Kin desires
to arrest their course. Terrible examples have tauht you how he
punishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have been taken to put
an end to disorder and to re-establish public security. A paternal
administration, chosen from amon yourselves, will form your
municipality or city overnment. It will take care of you, of your
needs, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinuished by a red
ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear a
white belt as well. But when not on duty they will only wear a red
ribbon round the left arm.

The city police is established on its former footin, and better order
already prevails in consequence of its activity. The overnment has
appointed two commissaries eneral, or chiefs of police, and twenty
commissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the different
wards of the city. You will reconize them by the white ribbon they will
wear on the left arm. Several churches of different denominations are
open, and divine service is performed in them unhindered. Your fellow
citizens are returnin every day to their homes and orders have been
iven that they should find in them the help and protection due to their
misfortunes. These are the measures the overnment has adopted to re-
establish order and relieve your condition. But to achieve this aim it
is necessary that you should add your efforts and should, if possible,
foret the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain the hope of a
less cruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and inominious death
awaits those who make any attempt on your persons or on what remains of
your property, and finally that you should not doubt that these will be
safeuarded, since such is the will of the reatest and most just of
monarchs. Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you may be, re-
establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of a state, live
like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to another, unite to
defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the military and civil
authorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!

With reard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all the
troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisions
for themselves, so that the army miht have its future provided for.


* As looters.

With reard to reliion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brouht back
and services to be aain performed in the churches.

With reard to commerce and to provisionin the army, the followin was
placarded everywhere:

PROCLAMATION!

You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whom
misfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers of the
soil, still kept out in the fields by roundless fear, listen!
Tranquillity is returnin to this capital and order is bein restored in
it. Your fellow countrymen are emerin boldly from their hidin places
on findin that they are respected. Any violence to them or to their
property is promptly punished. His Majesty the Emperor and Kin protects
them, and considers no one amon you his enemy except those who disobey
his orders. He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your
homes and families. Respond, therefore, to his benevolent intentions and
come to us without fear. Inhabitants, return with confidence to your
abodes! You will soon find means of satisfyin your needs. Craftsmen and
industrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,
where the protection of uards awaits you! You shall receive proper pay
for your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where
you are hidin in terror, return to your huts without fear, in full
assurance that you will find protection! Markets are established in the
city where peasants can brin their surplus supplies and the products of
the soil. The overnment has taken the followin steps to ensure freedom
of sale for them: (1) From today, peasants, husbandmen, and those livin
in the neihborhood of Moscow may without any daner brin their
supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets, of which one is on the
Mokhovaya Street and the other at the Provision Market. (2) Such
supplies will be bouht from them at such prices as seller and buyer may
aree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be
free to take his oods back to his villae and no one may hinder him
under any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed
as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops
will be stationed alon the hihroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such
distances from the town as to protect the carts. (4) Similar measures
will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no
hindrance on their return journey. (5) Steps will immediately be taken
to re-establish ordinary tradin.

Inhabitants of the city and villaes, and you, workinmen and artisans,
to whatever nation you belon, you are called on to carry out the
paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and Kin and to co-
operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect and confidence
at his feet and do not delay to unite with us!

With the object of raisin the spirits of the troops and of the people,
reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. The Emperor rode
throuh the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and, despite his
preoccupation with state affairs, himself visited the theaters that were
established by his order.

In reard to philanthropy, the reatest virtue of crowned heads,
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
Mere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combinin
tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. He
visited the Foundlin Hospital and, allowin the orphans saved by him to
kiss his white hands, raciously conversed with Tutolmin. Then, as
Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in fored
Russian money which he had prepared: "Raisin the use of these means by
an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief be
distributed to those who had been burned out. But as food was too
precious to be iven to foreiners, who were for the most part enemies,
Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food
from outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them."

With reference to army discipline, orders were continually bein issued
to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties
and to suppress robbery.




CHAPTER X

But strane to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans--which were
not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances--did not
affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detached
from the mechanism, swun about in an arbitrary and aimless way without
enain the cowheels.

With reference to the military side--the plan of campain--that work of
enius of which Thiers remarks that, "His enius never devised anythin
more profound, more skillful, or more admirable," and enters into a
polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of enius must be referred
not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October--that plan never was
or could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts of
the case. The fortifyin of the Kremlin, for which la Mosquee (as
Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have been
razed to the round, proved quite useless. The minin of the Kremlin
only helped toward fulfillin Napoleon's wish that it should be blown up
when he left Moscow--as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt
himself to be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about which
Napoleon was so concerned, produced an unheard-of result. The French
enerals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men, and
accordin to Thiers it was only eventually found, like a lost pin, by
the skill--and apparently the enius--of Murat.

With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon's aruments as to his
mananimity and justice, both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev (whose chief
concern was to obtain a reatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;
Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their
embassae.

With reard to leal matters, after the execution of the supposed
incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.

With reard to administrative matters, the establishment of a
municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain
people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of
preservin order looted Moscow or saved their own property from bein
looted.

With reard to reliion, as to which in Eypt matters had so easily been
settled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results were achieved. Two
or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out
Napoleon's wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a French
soldier while conductin service, and a French official reported of
another that: "The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleaned
and locked up the church. That niht the doors were aain broken open,
the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, and other disorders
perpetrated."

With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen and
to peasants evoked no response. There were no industrious workmen, and
the peasants cauht the commissaries who ventured too far out of town
with the proclamation and killed them.

As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops,
these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up in the
Kremlin and in Posnyakov's house were closed aain at once because the
actors and actresses were robbed.

Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The enuine as well
as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value. The
French, collectin booty, cared only for old. Not only was the paper
money valueless which Napoleon so raciously distributed to the
unfortunate, but even silver lost its value in relation to old.

But the most amazin example of the ineffectiveness of the orders iven
by the authorities at that time was Napoleon's attempt to stop the
lootin and re-establish discipline.

This is what the army authorities were reportin:

"Lootin continues in the city despite the decrees aainst it. Order is
not yet restored and not a sinle merchant is carryin on trade in a
lawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolen
oods."

"The neihborhood of my ward continues to be pillaed by soldiers of the
3rd Corps who, not satisfied with takin from the unfortunate
inhabitants hidin in the cellars the little they have left, even have
the ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedly
witnessed."

"Nothin new, except that the soldiers are robbin and pillain--
October 9."

"Robbery and pillain continue. There is a band of thieves in our
district who ouht to be arrested by a stron force--October 11."

"The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to
stop pillae, parties of maraudin uards are continually seen returnin
to the Kremlin. Amon the Old uard disorder and pillae were renewed
more violently than ever yesterday evenin, last niht, and today. The
Emperor sees with reret that the picked soldiers appointed to uard his
person, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience to
such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containin army
supplies. Others have disraced themselves to the extent of disobeyin
sentinels and officers, and have abused and beaten them."

"The rand Marshal of the palace," wrote the overnor, "complains
bitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue to
commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows
of the Emperor."

That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and tramplin underfoot the
provender which miht have saved it from starvation, disinterated and
perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But it did not
o away.

It bean to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the
capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by the battle of
Tarutino. The news of that battle of Tarutino, unexpectedly received by
Napoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians
(Thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the whole
army was demandin.

Fleein from Moscow the soldiers took with them everythin they had
stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, but on
seein the baae trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)
horror-struck. And yet with his experience of war he did not order all
the superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done with those of a
certain marshal when approachin Moscow. He azed at the caleches and
carriaes in which soldiers were ridin and remarked that it was a very
ood thin, as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions, the
sick, and the wounded.

The pliht of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal which
feels it is perishin and does not know what it is doin. To study the
skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time it
entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studyin the dyin leaps
and shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Very often a wounded animal,
hearin a rustle, rushes straiht at the hunter's un, runs forward and
back aain, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from his
whole army, did the same thin. The rustle of the battle of Tarutino
frihtened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter's un,
reached him, turned back, and finally--like any wild beast--ran back
alon the most disadvantaeous and danerous path, where the old scent
was familiar.

Durin the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have been
the leader of all these movements--as the fiurehead of a ship may seem
to a savae to uide the vessel--acted like a child who, holdin a
couple of strins inside a carriae, thinks he is drivin it.




CHAPTER XI

Early in the mornin of the sixth of October Pierre went out of the
shed, and on returnin stopped by the door to play with a little blue-
ray do, with a lon body and short bandy les, that jumped about him.
This little do lived in their shed, sleepin beside Karataev at niht;
it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned aain.
Probably it had never had an owner, and it still beloned to nobody and
had no name. The French called it Azor; the soldier who told stories
called it Femalka; Karataev and others called it ray, or sometimes
Flabby. Its lack of a master, a name, or even of a breed or any definite
color did not seem to trouble the blue-ray do in the least. Its furry
tail stood up firm and round as a plume, its bandy les served it so
well that it would often racefully lift a hind le and run very easily
and quickly on three les, as if disdainin to use all four. Everythin
pleased it. Now it would roll on its back, yelpin with deliht, now
bask in the sun with a thouhtful air of importance, and now frolic
about playin with a chip of wood or a straw.

Pierre's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the only remnant
of his former clothin), a pair of soldier's trousers which by
Karataev's advice he tied with strin round the ankles for warmth, and a
peasant coat and cap. Physically he had chaned much durin this time.
He no loner seemed stout, thouh he still had the appearance of
solidity and strenth hereditary in his family. A beard and mustache
covered the lower part of his face, and a tanle of hair, infested with
lice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyes was
resolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. The former
slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by an
eneretic readiness for action and resistance. His feet were bare.

Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemen
were passin that mornin, then into the distance across the river, then
at the do who was pretendin to be in earnest about bitin him, and
then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in various
positions, movin his dirty thick bi toes. Every time he looked at his
bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.
The siht of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learned
durin these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him.

For some days the weather had been calm and clear with sliht frosts in
the mornins--what is called an "old wives' summer."

In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularly
pleasant with the invioratin freshness of the mornin frost still in
the air.

On everythin--far and near--lay the maic crystal litter seen only at
that time of autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,
with the villae, the church, and the lare white house. The bare trees,
the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the reen church spire,
and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in the
transparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.
Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansion
occupied by the French, with lilac bushes still showin dark reen
beside the fence. And even that ruined and befouled house--which in dull
weather was repulsively uly--seemed quietly beautiful now, in the
clear, motionless brilliance.

A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap on
his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner of
the shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink.

"What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.) "Eh? Just like
sprin!"

And the corporal leaned aainst the door and offered Pierre his pipe,
thouh whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.

"To be on the march in such weather..." he bean.

Pierre inquired what was bein said about leavin, and the corporal told
him that nearly all the troops were startin and there ouht to be an
order about the prisoners that day. Sokolov, one of the soldiers in the
shed with Pierre, was dyin, and Pierre told the corporal that somethin
should be done about him. The corporal replied that Pierre need not
worry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital and
arranements would be made for the sick, and that in eneral everythin
that could happen had been foreseen by the authorities.

"Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,
you know. He is a man who never forets anythin. Speak to the captain
when he makes his round, he will do anythin for you."

(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had lon chats with Pierre
and showed him all sorts of favors.)

"'You see, St. Thomas,' he said to me the other day. 'Monsieur Kiril is
a man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seineur who has
had misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what's what.... If he wants
anythin and asks me, he won't et a refusal. When one has studied, you
see, one likes education and well-bred people.' It is for your sake I
mention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had not been for you
that affair would have ended ill."

And after chattin a while loner, the corporal went away. (The affair
he had alluded to had happened a few days before--a fiht between the
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in
pacifyin his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre
talkin to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.
While Pierre was repeatin what he had been told about the army leavin
Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door of
the shed. Rapidly and timidly raisin his finers to his forehead by way
of reetin, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he had
iven a shirt to sew was in that shed.

A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,
which they had iven out to the prisoners to make up into boots and
shirts for them.

"Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, comin out with a neatly
folded shirt.

Karataev, on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work,
was wearin only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot. His
hair was bound round, workman fashion, with a wisp of lime-tree bast,
and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever.

"A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and here it is,
ready," said Platon, smilin and unfoldin the shirt he had sewn.

The Frenchman lanced around uneasily and then, as if overcomin his
hesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had a
lon, reasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin bare
body, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners lookin on
would lauh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly. None
of the prisoners said a word.

"See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeatin, pullin the shirt straiht.

The Frenchman, havin pushed his head and hands throuh, without raisin
his eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams.

"You see, dear man, this is not a sewin shop, and I had no proper
tools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse," said
Platon with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work.

"It's ood, quite ood, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French, "but
there must be some linen left over."

"It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,
still admirin his handiwork. "You'll be nice and comfortable...."

"Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?" said the
Frenchman aain and smiled. He took out an assination ruble note and
ave it to Karataev. "But ive me the pieces that are over."

Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman was
sayin, and he looked on without interferin. Karataev thanked the
Frenchman for the money and went on admirin his own work. The Frenchman
insisted on havin the pieces returned that were left over and asked
Pierre to translate what he said.

"What does he want the bits for?" said Karataev. "They'd make fine le
bands for us. Well, never mind."

And Karataev, with a suddenly chaned and saddened expression, took a
small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and ave it to the
Frenchman without lookin at him. "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev and went
away. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment, then
looked inquirinly at Pierre and, as if Pierre's look had told him
somethin, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:

"Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!" And handin back the odd
bits he turned and went out.

"There, look at that," said Karataev, swayin his head. "People said
they were not Christians, but they too have souls. It's what the old
folk used to say: 'A sweatin hand's an open hand, a dry hand's close.'
He's naked, but yet he's iven it back."

Karataev smiled thouhtfully and was silent awhile lookin at the
pieces.

"But they'll make rand le bands, dear friend," he said, and went back
into the shed.




CHAPTER XII

Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and thouh
the French had offered to move him from the men's to the officers' shed,
he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.

In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extreme
limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physical
strenth and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, and
thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so radually that
it was impossible to say when they bean, he endured his position not
only lihtly but joyfully. And just at this time he obtained the
tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.
He had lon souht in different ways that tranquillity of mind, that
inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle
of Borodino. He had souht it in philanthropy, in Freemasonry, in the
dissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,
and in romantic love for Natasha; he had souht it by reasonin--and all
these quests and experiments had failed him. And now without thinkin
about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only throuh the
horror of death, throuh privation, and throuh what he reconized in
Karataev.

Those dreadful moments he had lived throuh at the executions had as it
were forever washed away from his imaination and memory the aitatin
thouhts and feelins that had formerly seemed so important. It did not
now occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, or politics, or
Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these thins were no business of
his, and that he was not called on to jude concernin them and
therefore could not do so. "Russia and summer weather are not bound
toether," he thouht, repeatin words of Karataev's which he found
stranely consolin. His intention of killin Napoleon and his
calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse now
seemed to him meaninless and even ridiculous. His aner with his wife
and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely
trivial but even amusin. What concern was it of his that somewhere or
other that woman was leadin the life she preferred? What did it matter
to anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out that
their prisoner's name was Count Bezukhov?

He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite
areed with him, thouh he understood Prince Andrew's thouhts somewhat
differently. Prince Andrew had thouht and said that happiness could
only be neative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony
as thouh he was really sayin that all desire for positive happiness is
implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied. But Pierre
believed it without any mental reservation. The absence of sufferin,
the satisfaction of one's needs and consequent freedom in the choice of
one's occupation, that is, of one's way of life, now seemed to Pierre to
be indubitably man's hihest happiness. Here and now for the first time
he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eatin when he wanted to eat,
drinkin when he wanted to drink, sleepin when he wanted to sleep, of
warmth when he was cold, of talkin to a fellow man when he wished to
talk and to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one's needs--ood
food, cleanliness, and freedom--now that he was deprived of all this,
seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice of
occupation, that is, of his way of life--now that that was so
restricted--seemed to him such an easy matter that he forot that a
superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfyin one's
needs, while reat freedom in the choice of occupation--such freedom as
his wealth, his education, and his social position had iven him in his
own life--is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly
difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of havin an
occupation.

All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free. Yet
subsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thouht and spoke with
enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, stron,
joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner
freedom which he experienced only durin those weeks.

When on the first day he ot up early, went out of the shed at dawn, and
saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virin still dark
at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty rass, the Sparrow Hills, and the
wooded banks above the windin river vanishin in the purple distance,
when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the
crows flyin from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards liht
leamed from the east and the sun's rim appeared solemnly from behind a
cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and the
river, all bean to sparkle in the lad liht--Pierre felt a new joy and
strenth in life such as he had never before known. And this not only
stayed with him durin the whole of his imprisonment, but even rew in
strenth as the hardships of his position increased.

That feelin of alertness and of readiness for anythin was still
further strenthened in him by the hih opinion his fellow prisoners
formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowlede of
lanuaes, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, his
readiness to ive anythin asked of him (he received the allowance of
three rubles a week made to officers); with his strenth, which he
showed to the soldiers by pressin nails into the walls of the hut; his
entleness to his companions, and his capacity for sittin still and
thinkin without doin anythin (which seemed to them incomprehensible),
he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior bein. The very
qualities that had been a hindrance, if not actually harmful, to him in
the world he had lived in--his strenth, his disdain for the comforts of
life, his absent-mindedness and simplicity--here amon these people ave
him almost the status of a hero. And Pierre felt that their opinion
placed responsibilities upon him.




CHAPTER XIII

The French evacuation bean on the niht between the sixth and seventh
of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troops
and baae trains started.

At seven in the mornin a French convoy in marchin trim, wearin shakos
and carryin muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front of
the sheds, and animated French talk minled with curses sounded all
alon the lines.

In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaited
the order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thin with dark
shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.
His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of his face, azed inquirinly
at his comrades who were payin no attention to him, and he moaned
reularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferins that
caused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and rief at bein
left alone.

Pierre, irt with a rope round his waist and wearin shoes Karataev had
made for him from some leather a French soldier had torn off a tea chest
and brouht to have his boots mended with, went up to the sick man and
squatted down beside him.

"You know, Sokolov, they are not all oin away! They have a hospital
here. You may be better off than we others," said Pierre.

"O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!" moaned the man in a
louder voice.

"I'll o and ask them aain directly," said Pierre, risin and oin to
the door of the shed.

Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a pipe
the day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporal and
soldiers were in marchin kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal
straps, and these chaned their familiar faces.

The corporal came, accordin to orders, to shut the door. The prisoners
had to be counted before bein let out.

"Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?..." Pierre bean.

But even as he spoke he bean to doubt whether this was the corporal he
knew or a straner, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that
moment. Moreover, just as Pierre was speakin a sharp rattle of drums
was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre's
words and, utterin some meaninless oaths, slammed the door. The shed
became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned
the sick man's roans.

"There it is!... It aain!..." said Pierre to himself, and an
involuntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal's chaned face,
in the sound of his voice, in the stirrin and deafenin noise of the
drums, he reconized that mysterious, callous force which compelled
people aainst their will to kill their fellow men--that force the
effect of which he had witnessed durin the executions. To fear or to
try to escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to those
who served as its tools, was useless. Pierre knew this now. One had to
wait and endure. He did not aain o to the sick man, nor turn to look
at him, but stood frownin by the door of the hut.

When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowdin aainst one
another like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushed his
way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal had
assured him was ready to do anythin for him. The captain was also in
marchin kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre
had reconized in the corporal's words and in the roll of the drums.

"Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frownin sternly, and
lookin at the prisoners who throned past him.

Pierre went up to him, thouh he knew his attempt would be vain.

"What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not reconizin
Pierre.

Pierre told him about the sick man.

"He'll manae to walk, devil take him!" said the captain. "Pass on, pass
on!" he continued without lookin at Pierre.

"But he is dyin," Pierre aain bean.

"Be so ood..." shouted the captain, frownin anrily.

"Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam..." rattled the drums, and Pierre understood
that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it
was now useless to say any more.

The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march
in front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre amon them, and
about three hundred men.

The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all straners to
Pierre and much better dressed than he. They looked at him and at his
shoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from him walked a fat major
with a sallow, bloated, anry face, who was wearin a Kazan dressin
own tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect of
his fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, in which he clasped his tobacco
pouch, inside the bosom of his dressin own and held the stem of his
pipe firmly with the other. Pantin and puffin, the major rumbled and
rowled at everybody because he thouht he was bein pushed and that
they were all hurryin when they had nowhere to hurry to and were all
surprised at somethin when there was nothin to be surprised at.
Another, a thin little officer, was speakin to everyone, conjecturin
where they were now bein taken and how far they would et that day. An
official in felt boots and wearin a commissariat uniform ran round from
side to side and azed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcin his
observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part
of the city was that they could see. A third officer, who by his accent
was a Pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, aruin that he was
mistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow.

"What are you disputin about?" said the major anrily. "What does it
matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it's burned
down, and there's an end of it.... What are you pushin for? Isn't the
road wide enouh?" said he, turnin to a man behind him who was not
pushin him at all.

"Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side and another
were heard sayin as they azed on the charred ruins. "All beyond the
river, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.... Just look! There's not half of
it left. Yes, I told you--the whole quarter beyond the river, and so it
is."

"Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talkin?" said the
major.

As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the few unburned
quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to one
side and exclamations of horror and disust were heard.

"Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... And
smeared with somethin!"

Pierre too drew near the church where the thin was that evoked these
exclamations, and dimly made out somethin leanin aainst the palins
surroundin the church. From the words of his comrades who saw better
than he did, he found that this was the body of a man, set upriht
aainst the palins with its face smeared with soot.

"o on! What the devil... o on! Thirty thousand devils!..." the convoy
uards bean cursin and the French soldiers, with fresh virulence,
drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were azin at
the dead man.




CHAPTER XIV

Throuh the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisoners
marched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and waons
belonin to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores they
came amon a hue and closely packed train of artillery minled with
private vehicles.

At the bride they all halted, waitin for those in front to et across.
From the bride they had a view of endless lines of movin baae
trains before and behind them. To the riht, where the Kalua road turns
near Neskuchny, endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into the
distance. These were troops of Beauharnais' corps which had started
before any of the others. Behind, alon the riverside and across the
Stone Bride, were Ney's troops and transport.

Davout's troops, in whose chare were the prisoners, were crossin the
Crimean bride and some were already debouchin into the Kalua road.
But the baae trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais'
train had not yet ot out of Moscow and reached the Kalua road when the
vanuard of Ney's army was already emerin from the reat Ordynka
Street.

When they had crossed the Crimean bride the prisoners moved a few steps
forward, halted, and aain moved on, and from all sides vehicles and men
crowded closer and closer toether. They advanced the few hundred paces
that separated the bride from the Kalua road, takin more than an hour
to do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of the
Transmoskva ward and the Kalua road convere, and the prisoners jammed
close toether had to stand for some hours at that crossway. From all
sides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, the
tramp of feet, and incessant shouts of aner and abuse. Pierre stood
pressed aainst the wall of a charred house, listenin to that noise
which minled in his imaination with the roll of the drums.

To et a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall of
the half-burned house aainst which Pierre was leanin.

"What crowds! Just look at the crowds!... They've loaded oods even on
the cannon! Look there, those are furs!" they exclaimed. "Just see what
the blackuards have looted.... There! See what that one has behind in
the cart.... Why, those are settins taken from some icons, by
heaven!... Oh, the rascals!... See how that fellow has loaded himself
up, he can hardly walk! ood lord, they've even rabbed those
chaises!... See that fellow there sittin on the trunks.... Heavens!
They're fihtin."

"That's riht, hit him on the snout--on his snout! Like this, we shan't
et away before evenin. Look, look there.... Why, that must be
Napoleon's own. See what horses! And the monorams with a crown! It's
like a portable house.... That fellow's dropped his sack and doesn't see
it. Fihtin aain... A woman with a baby, and not bad-lookin either!
Yes, I dare say, that's the way they'll let you pass... Just look,
there's no end to it. Russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! In
carriaes--see how comfortably they've settled themselves!"

Aain, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of eneral curiosity bore
all the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks to his
stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted their
curiosity. In three carriaes involved amon the munition carts, closely
squeezed toether, sat women with roued faces, dressed in larin
colors, who were shoutin somethin in shrill voices.

From the moment Pierre had reconized the appearance of the mysterious
force nothin had seemed to him strane or dreadful: neither the corpse
smeared with soot for fun nor these women hurryin away nor the burned
ruins of Moscow. All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impression
on him--as if his soul, makin ready for a hard strule, refused to
receive impressions that miht weaken it.

The women's vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts, soldiers,
waons, soldiers, un carriaes, carriaes, soldiers, ammunition carts,
more soldiers, and now and then women.

Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.

All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisible
power. Durin the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowin from
the different streets with one and the same desire to et on quickly;
they all jostled one another, bean to row anry and to fiht, white
teeth leamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew from
side to side, and all the faces bore the same swaerinly resolute and
coldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that mornin on the
corporal's face when the drums were beatin.

It was not till nearly evenin that the officer commandin the escort
collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in amon
the baae trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emered
onto the Kalua road.

They marched very quickly, without restin, and halted only when the sun
bean to set. The baae carts drew up close toether and the men bean
to prepare for their niht's rest. They all appeared anry and
dissatisfied. For a lon time, oaths, anry shouts, and fihtin could
be heard from all sides. A carriae that followed the escort ran into
one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole. Several
soldiers ran toward the cart from different sides: some beat the
carriae horses on their heads, turnin them aside, others fouht amon
themselves, and Pierre saw that one erman was badly wounded on the head
by a sword.

It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields in
the chill dusk of the autumn evenin, experienced one and the same
feelin of unpleasant awakenin from the hurry and eaerness to push on
that had seized them at the start. Once at a standstill they all seemed
to understand that they did not yet know where they were oin, and that
much that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey.

Durin this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than they
had done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for the first time
received horseflesh for their meat ration.

From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed like
personal spite aainst each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast to
their former friendly relations.

This spite increased still more when, on callin over the roll of
prisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leavin Moscow one Russian
soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped. Pierre saw
a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for strayin too far from the
road, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to court-
martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of the
Russian. To the noncommissioned officer's excuse that the prisoner was
ill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shoot
those who laed behind. Pierre felt that that fatal force which had
crushed him durin the executions, but which he had not felt durin his
imprisonment, now aain controlled his existence. It was terrible, but
he felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush
him, there rew and strenthened in his soul a power of life independent
of it.

He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with his
comrades.

Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen in
Moscow, or of the rouhness of their treatment by the French, or of the
order to shoot them which had been announced to them. As if in reaction
aainst the worsenin of their position they were all particularly
animated and ay. They spoke of personal reminiscences, of amusin
scenes they had witnessed durin the campain, and avoided all talk of
their present situation.

The sun had set lon since. Briht stars shone out here and there in the
sky. A red low as of a conflaration spread above the horizon from the
risin full moon, and that vast red ball swayed stranely in the ray
haze. It rew liht. The evenin was endin, but the niht had not yet
come. Pierre ot up and left his new companions, crossin between the
campfires to the other side of the road where he had been told the
common soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. On
the road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.

Pierre turned back, not to his companions by the campfire, but to an
unharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tuckin his les under him and
droppin his head he sat down on the cold round by the wheel of the
cart and remained motionless a lon while sunk in thouht. Suddenly he
burst out into a fit of his broad, ood-natured lauhter, so loud that
men from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strane and
evidently solitary lauhter could mean.

"Ha-ha-ha!" lauhed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: "The soldier
did not let me pass. They took me and shut me up. They hold me captive.
What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!..." and he lauhed
till tears started to his eyes.

A man ot up and came to see what this queer bi fellow was lauhin at
all by himself. Pierre stopped lauhin, ot up, went farther away from
the inquisitive man, and looked around him.

The hue, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with the
cracklin of campfires and the voices of many men had rown quiet, the
red campfires were rowin paler and dyin down. Hih up in the liht
sky hun the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseen
before, were now visible in the distance. And farther still, beyond
those forests and fields, the briht, oscillatin, limitless distance
lured one to itself. Pierre lanced up at the sky and the twinklin
stars in its faraway depths. "And all that is me, all that is within me,
and it is all I!" thouht Pierre. "And they cauht all that and put it
into a shed boarded up with planks!" He smiled, and went and lay down to
sleep beside his companions.




CHAPTER XV

In the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with a letter
from Napoleon proposin peace and falsely dated from Moscow, thouh
Napoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kalua road.
Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerly
brouht by Lauriston, sayin that there could be no question of peace.

Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's uerrilla
detachment operatin to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier's
division had been seen at Forminsk and that bein separated from the
rest of the French army they miht easily be destroyed. The soldiers and
officers aain demanded action. enerals on the staff, excited by the
memory of the easy victory at Tarutino, ured Kutuzov to carry out
Dorokhov's suestion. Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary.
The result was a compromise which was inevitable: a small detachment was
sent to Forminsk to attack Broussier.

By a strane coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a most
difficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhturov--that same
modest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawin up
plans of battles, dashin about in front of reiments, showerin crosses
on batteries, and so on, and who was thouht to be and was spoken of as
undecided and undiscernin--but whom we find commandin wherever the
position was most difficult all throuh the Russo-French wars from
Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at the
Auezd dam, rallyin the reiments, savin what was possible when all
were flyin and perishin and not a sinle eneral was left in the rear
uard. Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men to
defend the town aainst Napoleon's whole army. In Smolensk, at the
Malakhov ate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before he
was awakened by the bombardment of the town--and Smolensk held out all
day lon. At the battle of Borodino, when Baration was killed and nine
tenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of the
French artillery fire was directed aainst it, the man sent there was
this same irresolute and undiscernin Dokhturov--Kutuzov hastenin to
rectify a mistake he had made by sendin someone else there first. And
the quiet little Dokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became the
reatest lory of the Russian army. Many heroes have been described to
us in verse and prose, but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said.

It was Dokhturov aain whom they sent to Forminsk and from there to
Malo-Yaroslavets, the place where the last battle with the French was
fouht and where the obvious disinteration of the French army bean;
and we are told of many eniuses and heroes of that period of the
campain, but of Dokhturov nothin or very little is said and that
dubiously. And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony to
his merit.

It is natural for a man who does not understand the workins of a
machine to imaine that a shavin that has fallen into it by chance and
is interferin with its action and tossin about in it is its most
important part. The man who does not understand the construction of the
machine cannot conceive that the small connectin cowheel which
revolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine, and
not the shavin which merely harms and hinders the workin.

On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had one halfway to Forminsk and
stopped at the villae of Aristovo, preparin faithfully to execute the
orders he had received, the whole French army havin, in its convulsive
movement, reached Murat's position apparently in order to ive battle--
suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new Kalua
road and bean to enter Forminsk, where only Broussier had been till
then. At that time Dokhturov had under his command, besides Dorokhov's
detachment, the two small uerrilla detachments of Finer and Seslavin.

On the evenin of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarters
with a French uardsman he had captured. The prisoner said that the
troops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanuard of the whole
army, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow four
days previously. That same evenin a house serf who had come from
Borovsk said he had seen an immense army enterin the town. Some
Cossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported havin sihted the French
uards marchin alon the road to Borovsk. From all these reports it was
evident that where they had expected to meet a sinle division there was
now the whole French army marchin from Moscow in an unexpected
direction--alon the Kalua road. Dokhturov was unwillin to undertake
any action, as it was not clear to him now what he ouht to do. He had
been ordered to attack Forminsk. But only Broussier had been there at
that time and now the whole French army was there. Ermolov wished to act
on his own judment, but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov's
instructions. So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff.

For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovitinov, was chosen, who was
to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides deliverin a
written report. Toward midniht Bolkhovitinov, havin received the
dispatch and verbal instructions, alloped off to the eneral Staff
accompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.




CHAPTER XVI

It was a warm, dark, autumn niht. It had been rainin for four days.
Havin chaned horses twice and alloped twenty miles in an hour and a
half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka after
one o'clock at niht. Dismountin at a cottae on whose wattle fence
hun a sinboard, ENERAL STAFF, and throwin down his reins, he entered
a dark passae.

"The eneral on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he to someone
who had risen and was sniffin in the dark passae.

"He has been very unwell since the evenin and this is the third niht
he has not slept," said the orderly pleadinly in a whisper. "You should
wake the captain first."

"But this is very important, from eneral Dokhturov," said
Bolkhovitinov, enterin the open door which he had found by feelin in
the dark.

The orderly had one in before him and bean wakin somebody.

"Your honor, your honor! A courier."

"What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice.

"From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich. Napoleon is at Forminsk,"
said Bolkhovitinov, unable to see in the dark who was speakin but
uessin by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn.

The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.

"I don't like wakin him," he said, fumblin for somethin. "He is very
ill. Perhaps this is only a rumor."

"Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov. "My orders are to ive it at
once to the eneral on duty."

"Wait a moment, I'll liht a candle. You damned rascal, where do you
always hide it?" said the voice of the man who was stretchin himself,
to the orderly. (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.) "I've
found it, I've found it!" he added.

The orderly was strikin a liht and Shcherbinin was fumblin for
somethin on the candlestick.

"Oh, the nasty beasts!" said he with disust.

By the liht of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin's youthful face
as he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.
This was Konovnitsyn.

When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned up,
first blue and then red, Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle, from the
candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been nawin it were
runnin away, and looked at the messener. Bolkhovitinov was bespattered
all over with mud and had smeared his face by wipin it with his sleeve.

"Who ave the report?" inquired Shcherbinin, takin the envelope.

"The news is reliable," said Bolkhovitinov. "Prisoners, Cossacks, and
the scouts all say the same thin."

"There's nothin to be done, we'll have to wake him," said Shcherbinin,
risin and oin up to the man in the nihtcap who lay covered by a
reatcoat. "Peter Petrovich!" said he. (Konovnitsyn did not stir.) "To
the eneral Staff!" he said with a smile, knowin that those words would
be sure to arouse him.

And in fact the head in the nihtcap was lifted at once. On
Konovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,
there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remote
from present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumed
its habitual calm and firm appearance.

"Well, what is it? From whom?" he asked immediately but without hurry,
blinkin at the liht.

While listenin to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal and
read the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered his les in
their woolen stockins to the earthen floor and bean puttin on his
boots. Then he took off his nihtcap, combed his hair over his temples,
and donned his cap.

"Did you et here quickly? Let us o to his Hihness."

Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brouht was of reat
importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or ask
himself whether the news was ood or bad. That did not interest him. He
rearded the whole business of the war not with his intellience or his
reason but by somethin else. There was within him a deep unexpressed
conviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to this
and still less speak about it, but must only attend to one's own work.
And he did his work, ivin his whole strenth to the task.

Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have been included
merely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of 1812-
-the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, and Miloradoviches. Like
Dokhturov he had the reputation of bein a man of very limited capacity
and information, and like Dokhturov he never made plans of battle but
was always found where the situation was most difficult. Since his
appointment as eneral on duty he had always slept with his door open,
ivin orders that every messener should be allowed to wake him up. In
battle he was always under fire, so that Kutuzov reproved him for it and
feared to send him to the front, and like Dokhturov he was one of those
unnoticed cowheels that, without clatter or noise, constitute the most
essential part of the machine.

Comin out of the hut into the damp, dark niht Konovnitsyn frowned--
partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at the unpleasant
thouht that occurred to him, of how all that nest of influential men on
the staff would be stirred up by this news, especially Bennisen, who
ever since Tarutino had been at daers drawn with Kutuzov; and how they
would make suestions, quarrel, issue orders, and rescind them. And
this premonition was disareeable to him thouh he knew it could not be
helped.

And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediately
bean to expound his plans to a eneral sharin his quarters, until
Konovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they must
o to see his Hihness.




CHAPTER XVII

Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at niht. He often fell
asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at niht, lyin on his bed
without undressin, he enerally remained awake thinkin.

So he lay now on his bed, supportin his lare, heavy, scarred head on
his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditatin and peerin into the
darkness.

Since Bennisen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had more
influence than anyone else on the staff, had beun to avoid him, Kutuzov
was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops bein
oblied to take part in useless aressive movements. The lesson of the
Tarutino battle and of the day before it, which Kutuzov remembered with
pain, must, he thouht, have some effect on others too.

"They must understand that we can only lose by takin the offensive.
Patience and time are my warriors, my champions," thouht Kutuzov. He
knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is reen. It will fall
of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the tree
is harmed, and your teeth are set on ede. Like an experienced sportsman
he knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the whole
strenth of Russia could have wounded it, but whether it was mortally
wounded or not was still an undecided question. Now by the fact of
Lauriston and Barthelemi havin been sent, and by the reports of the
uerrillas, Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But he
needed further proofs and it was necessary to wait.

"They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shall
see! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thouht he. "What for?
Only to distinuish themselves! As if fihtin were fun. They are like
children from whom one can't et any sensible account of what has
happened because they all want to show how well they can fiht. But
that's not what is needed now.

"And what inenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems to them
that when they have thouht of two or three continencies" (he
remembered the eneral plan sent him from Petersbur) "they have
foreseen everythin. But the continencies are endless."

The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino was
mortal or not had hun over Kutuzov's head for a whole month. On the one
hand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutuzov felt assured
with all his bein that the terrible blow into which he and all the
Russians had put their whole strenth must have been mortal. But in any
case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and rew
more impatient the loner he waited. Lyin on his bed durin those
sleepless nihts he did just what he reproached those youner enerals
for doin. He imained all sorts of possible continencies, just like
the youner men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands of
continencies instead of two or three and based nothin on them. The
loner he thouht the more continencies presented themselves. He
imained all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or in
sections--aainst Petersbur, or aainst him, or to outflank him. He
thouht too of the possibility (which he feared most of all) that
Napoleon miht fiht him with his own weapon and remain in Moscow
awaitin him. Kutuzov even imained that Napoleon's army miht turn back
throuh Medyn and Yukhnov, but the one thin he could not foresee was
what happened--the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon's army durin
its first eleven days after leavin Moscow: a stampede which made
possible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of--the complete
extermination of the French. Dorokhov's report about Broussier's
division, the uerrillas' reports of distress in Napoleon's army, rumors
of preparations for leavin Moscow, all confirmed the supposition that
the French army was beaten and preparin for fliht. But these were only
suppositions, which seemed important to the youner men but not to
Kutuzov. With his sixty years' experience he knew what value to attach
to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anythin are to roup all news
so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readily
in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. And the more he
desired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This question
absorbed all his mental powers. All else was to him only life's
customary routine. To such customary routine beloned his conversations
with the staff, the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael,
the readin of novels, the distribution of awards, his correspondence
with Petersbur, and so on. But the destruction of the French, which he
alone foresaw, was his heart's one desire.

On the niht of the eleventh of October he lay leanin on his arm and
thinkin of that.

There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,
Konovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov.

"Eh, who's there? Come in, come in! What news?" the field marshal called
out to them.

While a footman was lihtin a candle, Toll communicated the substance
of the news.

"Who brouht it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candle was
lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.

"There can be no doubt about it, your Hihness."

"Call him in, call him here."

Kutuzov sat up with one le hanin down from the bed and his bi paunch
restin aainst the other which was doubled under him. He screwed up his
seein eye to scrutinize the messener more carefully, as if wishin to
read in his face what preoccupied his own mind.

"Tell me, tell me, friend," said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low, aed
voice, as he pulled toether the shirt which aped open on his chest,
"come nearer--nearer. What news have you brouht me? Eh? That Napoleon
has left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"

Bolkhovitinov ave a detailed account from the beinnin of all he had
been told to report.

"Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.

Bolkhovitinov told him everythin and was then silent, awaitin
instructions. Toll was beinnin to say somethin but Kutuzov checked
him. He tried to say somethin, but his face suddenly puckered and
wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side of
the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hun there.

"O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer..." said he in a
tremulous voice with folded hands. "Russia is saved. I thank Thee, O
Lord!" and he wept.




CHAPTER XVIII

From the time he received this news to the end of the campain all
Kutuzov's activity was directed toward restrainin his troops, by
authority, by uile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks, maneuvers,
or encounters with the perishin enemy. Dokhturov went to Malo-
Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov linered with the main army and ave orders for
the evacuation of Kalua--a retreat beyond which town seemed to him
quite possible.

Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waitin for his
retreat fled in the opposite direction.

Napoleon's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutino
and Malo-Yaroslavets, and make conjectures as to what would have
happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southern
provinces.

But not to speak of the fact that nothin prevented him from advancin
into those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar his
way), the historians foret that nothin could have saved his army, for
then already it bore within itself the erms of inevitable ruin. How
could that army--which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and had
trampled them underfoot instead of keepin them, and on arrivin at
Smolensk had looted provisions instead of storin them--how could that
army recuperate in Kalua province, which was inhabited by Russians such
as those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property of
consumin what was set ablaze?

That army could not recover anywhere. Since the battle of Borodino and
the pillae of Moscow it had borne within itself, as it were, the
chemical elements of dissolution.

The members of what had once been an army--Napoleon himself and all his
soldiers fled--without knowin whither, each concerned only to make his
escape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness of
which they were all more or less vauely conscious.

So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when the
enerals pretendin to confer toether expressed various opinions, all
mouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldier
Mouton who, speakin last, said what they all felt: that the one thin
needful was to et away as quickly as possible; and no one, not even
Napoleon, could say anythin aainst that truth which they all
reconized.

But thouh they all realized that it was necessary to et away, there
still remained a feelin of shame at admittin that they must flee. An
external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came in
due time. It was what the French called "le hourra de l'Empereur."

The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode out early in
the mornin amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and an
escort, on the pretext of inspectin the army and the scene of the
previous and of the impendin battle. Some Cossacks on the prowl for
booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him. If the
Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the very
thin that was destroyin the French army, the booty on which the
Cossacks fell. Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder, leavin the
men. Disreardin Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleon
manaed to escape.

When les enfants du Don miht so easily have taken the Emperor himself
in the midst of his army, it was clear that there was nothin for it but
to fly as fast as possible alon the nearest, familiar road. Napoleon
with his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint, not feelin his
former aility and boldness, and under the influence of the friht the
Cossacks had iven him he at once areed with Mouton and issued orders--
as the historians tell us--to retreat by the Smolensk road.

That Napoleon areed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does not
prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces which
influenced the whole army and directed it alon the Mozhaysk (that is,
the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.




CHAPTER XIX

A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able to o
a thousand miles he must imaine that somethin ood awaits him at the
end of those thousand miles. One must have the prospect of a promised
land to have the strenth to move.

The promised land for the French durin their advance had been Moscow,
durin their retreat it was their native land. But that native land was
too far off, and for a man oin a thousand miles it is absolutely
necessary to set aside his final oal and to say to himself: "Today I
shall et to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and spend
the niht," and durin the first day's journey that restin place
eclipses his ultimate oal and attracts all his hopes and desires. And
the impulses felt by a sinle person are always manified in a crowd.

For the French retreatin alon the old Smolensk road, the final oal--
their native land--was too remote, and their immediate oal was
Smolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormously
intensified in the mass, ured them on. It was not that they knew that
much food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that they were
told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,
knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone could
ive them strenth to move on and endure their present privations. So
both those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves, and
pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.

Comin out onto the hihroad the French fled with surprisin enery and
unheard-of rapidity toward the oal they had fixed on. Besides the
common impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass and
supplied them with a certain enery, there was another cause bindin
them toether--their reat numbers. As with the physical law of ravity,
their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself. In their
hundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation.

Each of them desired nothin more than to ive himself up as a prisoner
to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the force
of this common attraction to Smolensk, their oal, drew each of them in
the same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrender
to a company, and thouh the French availed themselves of every
convenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on the
slihtest decent pretext, such pretexts did not always occur. Their very
numbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of that
possibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for the
Russians to stop this movement, to which the French were directin all
their eneries. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of the
body could hasten the process of decomposition.

A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certain
limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. On
the contrary the reater the heat the more solidified the remainin snow
becomes.

Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this. When the fliht
of the French army alon the Smolensk road became well defined, what
Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the niht of the eleventh of October bean
to occur. The superior officers all wanted to distinuish themselves, to
cut off, to seize, to capture, and to overthrow the French, and all
clamored for action.

Kutuzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limited in the
case of any commander-in-chief) to prevent an attack.

He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fiht, why block the road,
losin our own men and inhumanly slauhterin unfortunate wretches? What
is the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on the
road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" But drawin from his
aed wisdom what they could understand, he told them of the olden
bride, and they lauhed at and slandered him, flinin themselves on,
rendin and exultin over the dyin beast.

Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the French
near Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up two
French corps, and by way of reportin their intention to Kutuzov they
sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.

And try as Kutuzov miht to restrain the troops, our men attacked,
tryin to bar the road. Infantry reiments, we are told, advanced to the
attack with music and with drums beatin, and killed and lost thousands
of men.

But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,
closin up more firmly at the daner, continued, while steadily meltin
away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.

BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812




CHAPTER I

The Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow that followed it
and the fliht of the French without further conflicts, is one of the
most instructive phenomena in history.

All historians aree that the external activity of states and nations in
their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as a
direct result of reater or less success in war the political strenth
of states and nations increases or decreases.

Strane as may be the historical account of how some kin or emperor,
havin quarreled with another, collects an army, fihts his enemy's
army, ains a victory by killin three, five, or ten thousand men, and
subjuates a kindom and an entire nation of several millions, all the
facts of history (as far as we know it) confirm the truth of the
statement that the reater or lesser success of one army aainst another
is the cause, or at least an essential indication, of an increase or
decrease in the strenth of the nation--even thouh it is unintelliible
why the defeat of an army--a hundredth part of a nation--should oblie
that whole nation to submit. An army ains a victory, and at once the
rihts of the conquerin nation have increased to the detriment of the
defeated. An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its
rihts in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its army
suffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjuated.

So accordin to history it has been found from the most ancient times,
and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon's wars serve to confirm this
rule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian army Austria loses its
rihts, and the rihts and the strenth of France increase. The
victories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroy the independent
existence of Prussia.

But then, in 1812, the French ain a victory near Moscow. Moscow is
taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia that
ceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, and then
Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules of
history: to say that the field of battle at Borodino remained in the
hands of the Russians, or that after Moscow there were other battles
that destroyed Napoleon's army, is impossible.

After the French victory at Borodino there was no eneral enaement nor
any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist. What
does this mean? If it were an example taken from the history of China,
we miht say that it was not an historic phenomenon (which is the
historians' usual expedient when anythin does not fit their standards);
if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small number
of troops took part, we miht treat it as an exception; but this event
occurred before our fathers' eyes, and for them it was a question of the
life or death of their fatherland, and it happened in the reatest of
all known wars.

The period of the campain of 1812 from the battle of Borodino to the
expulsion of the French proved that the winnin of a battle does not
produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;
it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not in
the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in somethin else.

The French historians, describin the condition of the French army
before it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the rand Army,
except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport--there was no
forae for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no one could
remedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather than
let the French have it.

The victory ained did not brin the usual results because the peasants
Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in their
carts to pillae the town, and in eneral personally failed to manifest
any heroic feelins), and the whole innumerable multitude of such
peasants, did not brin their hay to Moscow for the hih price offered
them, but burned it instead.

Let us imaine two men who have come out to fiht a duel with rapiers
accordin to all the rules of the art of fencin. The fencin has one
on for some time; suddenly one of the combatants, feelin himself
wounded and understandin that the matter is no joke but concerns his
life, throws down his rapier, and seizin the first cudel that comes to
hand beins to brandish it. Then let us imaine that the combatant who
so sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end was
at the same time influenced by traditions of chivalry and, desirin to
conceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had ained his victory
with the rapier accordin to all the rules of art. One can imaine what
confusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.

The fencer who demanded a contest accordin to the rules of fencin was
the French army; his opponent who threw away the rapier and snatched up
the cudel was the Russian people; those who try to explain the matter
accordin to the rules of fencin are the historians who have described
the event.

After the burnin of Smolensk a war bean which did not follow any
previous traditions of war. The burnin of towns and villaes, the
retreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewed
retreat, the burnin of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure of
transports, and the uerrilla war were all departures from the rules.

Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencin
attitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudel
raised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and to
the Emperor Alexander that the war was bein carried on contrary to all
the rules--as if there were any rules for killin people. In spite of
the complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules, in
spite of the fact that to some hihly placed Russians it seemed rather
disraceful to fiht with a cudel and they wanted to assume a pose en
quarte or en tierce accordin to all the rules, and to make an adroit
thrust en prime, and so on--the cudel of the people's war was lifted
with all its menacin and majestic strenth, and without consultin
anyone's tastes or rules and reardless of anythin else, it rose and
fell with stupid simplicity, but consistently, and belabored the French
till the whole invasion had perished.

And it is well for a people who do not--as the French did in 1813--
salute accordin to all the rules of art, and, presentin the hilt of
their rapier racefully and politely, hand it to their mananimous
conqueror, but at the moment of trial, without askin what rules others
have adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the first
cudel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feelin of
resentment and revene in their soul yields to a feelin of contempt and
compassion.




CHAPTER II

One of the most obvious and advantaeous departures from the so-called
laws of war is the action of scattered roups aainst men pressed
toether in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on a
national character. In such actions, instead of two crowds opposin each
other, the men disperse, attack sinly, run away when attacked by
stroner forces, but aain attack when opportunity offers. This was done
by the uerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus, and
by the Russians in 1812.

People have called this kind of war "uerrilla warfare" and assume that
by so callin it they have explained its meanin. But such a war does
not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known rule
of tactics which is accepted as infallible. That rule says that an
attacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stroner than his
opponent at the moment of conflict.

uerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infrines
that rule.

This contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumes
the strenth of an army to be identical with its numbers. Military
science says that the more troops the reater the strenth. Les ros
bataillons ont toujours raison. *


* Lare battalions are always victorious.

For military science to say this is like definin momentum in mechanics
by reference to the mass only: statin that momenta are equal or unequal
to each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.

Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.

In military affairs the strenth of an army is the product of its mass
and some unknown x.

Military science, seein in history innumerable instances of the fact
that the size of any army does not coincide with its strenth and that
small detachments defeat larer ones, obscurely admits the existence of
this unknown factor and tries to discover it--now in a eometric
formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in the
enius of the commanders. But the assinment of these various meanins
to the factor does not yield results which accord with the historic
facts.

Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted to ratify
the "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime by
commanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.

That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, the
reater or lesser readiness to fiht and face daner felt by all the men
composin an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,
fihtin under the command of a enius, in two--or three-line formation,
with cudels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute. Men who
want to fiht will always put themselves in the most advantaeous
conditions for fihtin.

The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass ives
the resultin force. To define and express the sinificance of this
unknown factor--the spirit of an army--is a problem for science.

This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily to substitute for
the unknown x itself the conditions under which that force becomes
apparent--such as the commands of the eneral, the equipment employed,
and so on--mistakin these for the real sinificance of the factor, and
if we reconize this unknown quantity in its entirety as bein the
reater or lesser desire to fiht and to face daner. Only then,
expressin known historic facts by equations and comparin the relative
sinificance of this factor, can we hope to define the unknown.

Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fihtin fifteen men, battalions, or
divisions, conquer--that is, kill or take captive--all the others, while
themselves losin four, so that on the one side four and on the other
fifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal to the fifteen, and
therefore 4x = 15y. Consequently x/y = 15/4. This equation does not ive
us the value of the unknown factor but ives us a ratio between two
unknowns. And by brinin variously selected historic units (battles,
campains, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numbers
could be obtained in which certain laws should exist and miht be
discovered.

The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attackin, and
in smaller roups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that the
strenth of an army depends on its spirit. To lead men forward under
fire more discipline (obtainable only by movement in masses) is needed
than is needed to resist attacks. But this rule which leaves out of
account the spirit of the army continually proves incorrect and is in
particularly strikin contrast to the facts when some stron rise or
fall in the spirit of the troops occurs, as in all national wars.

The French, retreatin in 1812--thouh accordin to tactics they should
have separated into detachments to defend themselves--conreated into a
mass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the mass
held the army toether. The Russians, on the contrary, ouht accordin
to tactics to have attacked in mass, but in fact they split up into
small units, because their spirit had so risen that separate
individuals, without orders, dealt blows at the French without needin
any compulsion to induce them to expose themselves to hardships and
daners.




CHAPTER III

The so-called partisan war bean with the entry of the French into
Smolensk.

Before partisan warfare had been officially reconized by the
overnment, thousands of enemy stralers, marauders, and foraers had
been destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants, who killed them off as
instinctively as dos worry a stray mad do to death. Denis Davydov,
with his Russian instinct, was the first to reconize the value of this
terrible cudel which reardless of the rules of military science
destroyed the French, and to him belons the credit for takin the first
step toward reularizin this method of warfare.

On Auust 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and then
others were reconized. The further the campain proressed the more
numerous these detachments became.

The irreulars destroyed the reat army piecemeal. They athered the
fallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree--the
French army--and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October, when the
French were fleein toward Smolensk, there were hundreds of such
companies, of various sizes and characters. There were some that adopted
all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and the
comforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry. There were
also small scratch roups of foot and horse, and roups of peasants and
landowners that remained unknown. A sacristan commanded one party which
captured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and there
was Vasilisa, the wife of a villae elder, who slew hundreds of the
French.

The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days of
October. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,
amazed at their own boldness, feared every minute to be surrounded and
captured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddlin,
hardly darin to dismount and always expectin to be pursued. By the end
of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had become
clear to all what could be ventured aainst the French and what could
not. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and movin
accordin to rules at a distance from the French, still rearded many
thins as impossible. The small bands that had started their activities
lon before and had already observed the French closely considered
thins possible which the commanders of the bi detachments did not dare
to contemplate. The Cossacks and peasants who crept in amon the French
now considered everythin possible.

On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irreulars) was with his
roup at the heiht of the uerrilla enthusiasm. Since early mornin he
and his party had been on the move. All day lon he had been watchin
from the forest that skirted the hihroad a lare French convoy of
cavalry baae and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of the
army, which--as was learned from spies and prisoners--was movin under a
stron escort to Smolensk. Besides Denisov and Dolokhov (who also led a
small party and moved in Denisov's vicinity), the commanders of some
lare divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denisov
expressed it, were sharpenin their teeth for it. Two of the commanders
of lare parties--one a Pole and the other a erman--sent invitations to
Denisov almost simultaneously, requestin him to join up with their
divisions to attack the convoy.

"No, bwother, I have wown mustaches myself," said Denisov on readin
these documents, and he wrote to the erman that, despite his heartfelt
desire to serve under so valiant and renowned a eneral, he had to foro
that pleasure because he was already under the command of the Polish
eneral. To the Polish eneral he replied to the same effect, informin
him that he was already under the command of the erman.

Havin arraned matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, without
reportin matters to the hiher command, to attack and seize that convoy
with their own small forces. On October 22 it was movin from the
villae of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo. To the left of the road
between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were lare forests, extendin in
some places up to the road itself thouh in others a mile or more back
from it. Throuh these forests Denisov and his party rode all day,
sometimes keepin well back in them and sometimes comin to the very
ede, but never losin siht of the movin French. That mornin,
Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off into the forest
two waons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuck in the mud not
far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road. Since then,
and until evenin, the party had watched the movements of the French
without attackin. It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevo
quietly without alarmin them and then, after joinin Dolokhov who was
to come that evenin to a consultation at a watchman's hut in the forest
less than a mile from Shamshevo, to surprise the French at dawn, fallin
like an avalanche on their heads from two sides, and rout and capture
them all at one blow.

In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest came
riht up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any fresh
columns of French should show themselves.

Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way, to
find out at what distance there were other French troops. They reckoned
that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denisov had two hundred, and
Dolokhov miht have as many more, but the disparity of numbers did not
deter Denisov. All that he now wanted to know was what troops these were
and to learn that he had to capture a "tonue"--that is, a man from the
enemy column. That mornin's attack on the waons had been made so
hastily that the Frenchmen with the waons had all been killed; only a
little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straler he
could tell them nothin definite about the troops in that column.

Denisov considered it danerous to make a second attack for fear of
puttin the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty, a
peasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of the
French quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.




CHAPTER IV

It was a warm rainy autumn day. The sky and the horizon were both the
color of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, and then
suddenly heavy slantin rain came down.

Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran down
was ridin a thin thorouhbred horse with sunken sides. Like his horse,
which turned its head and laid its ears back, he shrank from the drivin
rain and azed anxiously before him. His thin face with its short, thick
black beard looked anry.

Beside Denisov rode an esaul, * Denisov's fellow worker, also in felt
cloak and sheepskin cap, and ridin a lare sleek Don horse.


* A captain of Cossacks.

Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straiht as an arrow, pale-
faced, fair-haired, with narrow liht eyes and with calm self-
satisfaction in his face and bearin. Thouh it was impossible to say in
what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at first lance at
the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and uncomfortable
and was a man mounted on a horse, while lookin at the esaul one saw
that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always and that he was
not a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who was one with his horse,
a bein consequently possessed of twofold strenth.

A little ahead of them walked a peasant uide, wet to the skin and
wearin a ray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.

A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirhiz mount with an enormous
tail and mane and a bleedin mouth, rode a youn officer in a blue
French overcoat.

Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniform and
blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held on to the
hussar with cold, red hands, and raisin his eyebrows azed about him
with surprise. This was the French drummer boy captured that mornin.

Behind them alon the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars in
threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in French
reatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. The horses,
bein drenched by the rain, all looked black whether chestnut or bay.
Their necks, with their wet, close-clinin manes, looked stranely
thin. Steam rose from them. Clothes, saddles, reins, were all wet,
slippery, and sodden, like the round and the fallen leaves that strewed
the road. The men sat huddled up tryin not to stir, so as to warm the
water that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh cold
water that was leakin in under their seats, their knees, and at the
back of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks two
waons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that had
been hitched on in front, rumbled over the tree stumps and branches and
splashed throuh the water that lay in the ruts.

Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumped
his rider's knee aainst a tree.

"Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov anrily, and showin his teeth he
struck his horse three times with his whip, splashin himself and his
comrades with mud.

Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from huner
(none of them had eaten anythin since mornin), and yet more because he
still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a "tonue"
had not returned.

"There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.
It's too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put it off till
another day one of the bi uerrilla detachments will snatch the prey
from under our noses," thouht Denisov, continually peerin forward,
hopin to see a messener from Dolokhov.

On comin to a path in the forest alon which he could see far to the
riht, Denisov stopped.

"There's someone comin," said he.

The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated.

"There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is not presupposable
that it is the lieutenant colonel himself," said the esaul, who was fond
of usin words the Cossacks did not know.

The approachin riders havin descended a decline were no loner
visible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a weary
allop and usin his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled and
drenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,
standin in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very youn
lad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, alloped up to Denisov
and handed him a sodden envelope.

"From the eneral," said the officer. "Please excuse its not bein quite
dry."

Denisov, frownin, took the envelope and opened it.

"There, they kept tellin us: 'It's danerous, it's danerous,'" said
the officer, addressin the esaul while Denisov was readin the
dispatch. "But Komarov and I"--he pointed to the Cossack--"were
prepared. We have each of us two pistols.... But what's this?" he asked,
noticin the French drummer boy. "A prisoner? You've already been in
action? May I speak to him?"

"Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, havin run throuh the dispatch.
"Why didn't you say who you were?" and turnin with a smile he held out
his hand to the lad.

The officer was Petya Rostov.

All the way Petya had been preparin himself to behave with Denisov as
befitted a rownup man and an officer--without hintin at their previous
acquaintance. But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brihtened up,
blushed with pleasure, forot the official manner he had been
rehearsin, and bean tellin him how he had already been in a battle
near Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinuished himself there.

"Well, I am lad to see you," Denisov interrupted him, and his face
aain assumed its anxious expression.

"Michael Feoklitych," said he to the esaul, "this is aain fwom that
erman, you know. He"--he indicated Petya--"is servin under him."

And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was a
repetition of the erman eneral's demand that he should join forces
with him for an attack on the transport.

"If we don't take it tomowwow, he'll snatch it fwom under our noses," he
added.

While Denisov was talkin to the esaul, Petya--abashed by Denisov's cold
tone and supposin that it was due to the condition of his trousers--
furtively tried to pull them down under his reatcoat so that no one
should notice it, while maintainin as martial an air as possible.

"Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holdin his
hand at the salute and resumin the ame of adjutant and eneral for
which he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with your honor?"

"Orders?" Denisov repeated thouhtfully. "But can you stay till
tomowwow?"

"Oh, please... May I stay with you?" cried Petya.

"But, just what did the enewal tell you? To weturn at once?" asked
Denisov.

Petya blushed.

"He ave me no instructions. I think I could?" he returned, inquirinly.

"Well, all wiht," said Denisov.

And turnin to his men he directed a party to o on to the haltin place
arraned near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer on
the Kirhiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to o and
find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evenin.
Denisov himself intended oin with the esaul and Petya to the ede of
the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have a look at the part
of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.

"Well, old fellow," said he to the peasant uide, "lead us to
Shamshevo."

Denisov, Petya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks and the
hussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine to the
ede of the forest.




CHAPTER V

The rain had stopped, and only the mist was fallin and drops from the
trees. Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, followin the
peasant in the knitted cap who, steppin lihtly with outturned toes and
movin noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,
silently led them to the ede of the forest.

He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to where
the screen of trees was less dense. On reachin a lare oak tree that
had not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriously to
them with his hand.

Denisov and Petya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasant was
standin they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on a
downward slope, lay a field of sprin rye. To the riht, beyond a steep
ravine, was a small villae and a landowner's house with a broken roof.
In the villae, in the house, in the arden, by the well, by the pond,
over all the risin round, and all alon the road uphill from the
bride leadin to the villae, not more than five hundred yards away,
crowds of men could be seen throuh the shimmerin mist. Their un-
Russian shoutin at their horses which were strainin uphill with the
carts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard.

"Bwin the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not takin his
eyes off the French.

A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him to Denisov.
Pointin to the French troops, Denisov asked him what these and those of
them were. The boy, thrustin his cold hands into his pockets and
liftin his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affriht, but in spite of an
evident desire to say all he knew ave confused answers, merely
assentin to everythin Denisov asked him. Denisov turned away from him
frownin and addressed the esaul, conveyin his own conjectures to him.

Petya, rapidly turnin his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now at
Denisov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the villae and
alon the road, tryin not to miss anythin of importance.

"Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" said Denisov with
a merry sparkle in his eyes.

"It is a very suitable spot," said the esaul.

"We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued.
"They'll cweep up to the arden; you'll wide up fwom there with the
Cossacks"--he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the villae--"and I
with my hussars fwom here. And at the sinal shot..."

"The hollow is impassable--there's a swamp there," said the esaul. "The
horses would sink. We must ride round more to the left...."

While they were talkin in undertones the crack of a shot sounded from
the low round by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared, then
another, and the sound of hundreds of seeminly merry French voices
shoutin toether came up from the slope. For a moment Denisov and the
esaul drew back. They were so near that they thouht they were the cause
of the firin and shoutin. But the firin and shoutin did not relate
to them. Down below, a man wearin somethin red was runnin throuh the
marsh. The French were evidently firin and shoutin at him.

"Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul.

"So it is! It is!"

"The wascal!" said Denisov.

"He'll et away!" said the esaul, screwin up his eyes.

The man whom they called Tikhon, havin run to the stream, pluned in so
that the water splashed in the air, and, havin disappeared for an
instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.
The French who had been pursuin him stopped.

"Smart, that!" said the esaul.

"What a beast!" said Denisov with his former look of vexation. "What has
he been doin all this time?"

"Who is he?" asked Petya.

"He's our plastun. I sent him to capture a 'tonue.'"

"Oh, yes," said Petya, noddin at the first words Denisov uttered as if
he understood it all, thouh he really did not understand anythin of
it.

Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band.
He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river zhat. When Denisov had
come to Pokrovsk at the beinnin of his operations and had as usual
summoned the villae elder and asked him what he knew about the French,
the elder, as thouh shieldin himself, had replied, as all villae
elders did, that he had neither seen nor heard anythin of them. But
when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, and
asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some
"more-orderers" had really been at their villae, but that Tikhon
Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters. Denisov had
Tikhon called and, havin praised him for his activity, said a few words
in the elder's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country and
the hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish.

"We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frihtened by
Denisov's words. "We only fooled about with the lads for fun, you know!
We killed a score or so of 'more-orderers,' but we did no harm else..."

Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, havin quite forotten about
this peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself to
their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it. Denisov ave
orders to let him do so.

Tikhon, who at first did rouh work, layin campfires, fetchin water,
flayin dead horses, and so on, soon showed a reat likin and aptitude
for partisan warfare. At niht he would o out for booty and always
brouht back French clothin and weapons, and when told to would brin
in French captives also. Denisov then relieved him from drudery and
bean takin him with him when he went out on expeditions and had him
enrolled amon the Cossacks.

Tikhon did not like ridin, and always went on foot, never lain
behind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carried
rather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf uses
its teeth, with equal ease pickin fleas out of its fur or crunchin
thick bones. Tikhon with equal accuracy would split los with blows at
arm's lenth, or holdin the head of the ax would cut thin little pes
or carve spoons. In Denisov's party he held a peculiar and exceptional
position. When anythin particularly difficult or nasty had to be done--
to push a cart out of the mud with one's shoulders, pull a horse out of
a swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in amon the French, or walk more
than thirty miles in a day--everybody pointed lauhinly at Tikhon.

"It won't hurt that devil--he's as stron as a horse!" they said of him.

Once a Frenchman Tikhon was tryin to capture fired a pistol at him and
shot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (which Tikhon
treated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was the
subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment--jokes in which
Tikhon readily joined.

"Hallo, mate! Never aain? ave you a twist?" the Cossacks would banter
him. And Tikhon, purposely writhin and makin faces, pretended to be
anry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The only effect
of this incident on Tikhon was that after bein wounded he seldom
brouht in prisoners.

He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one found more
opportunities for attackin, no one captured or killed more Frenchmen,
and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussars
and willinly accepted that role. Now he had been sent by Denisov
overniht to Shamshevo to capture a "tonue." But whether because he had
not been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had slept
throuh the niht, he had crept by day into some bushes riht amon the
French and, as Denisov had witnessed from above, had been detected by
them.




CHAPTER VI

After talkin for some time with the esaul about next day's attack,
which now, seein how near they were to the French, he seemed to have
definitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse and rode back.

"Now, my lad, we'll o and et dwy," he said to Petya.

As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peerin into the
forest. Amon the trees a man with lon les and lon, swinin arms,
wearin a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, was approachin
with lon, liht steps. He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an ax
stuck in his irdle. When he espied Denisov he hastily threw somethin
into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, and
approached his commander. It was Tikhon. His wrinkled and pockmarked
face and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. He
lifted his head hih and azed at Denisov as if repressin a lauh.

"Well, where did you disappear to?" inquired Denisov.

"Where did I disappear to? I went to et Frenchmen," answered Tikhon
boldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.

"Why did you push yourself in there by dayliht? You ass! Well, why
haven't you taken one?"

"Oh, I took one all riht," said Tikhon.

"Where is he?"

"You see, I took him first thin at dawn," Tikhon continued, spreadin
out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. "I took him
into the forest. Then I see he's no ood and think I'll o and fetch a
likelier one."

"You see?... What a woue--it's just as I thouht," said Denisov to the
esaul. "Why didn't you bwin that one?"

"What was the ood of brinin him?" Tikhon interrupted hastily and
anrily--"that one wouldn't have done for you. As if I don't know what
sort you want!"

"What a bwute you are!... Well?"

"I went for another one," Tikhon continued, "and I crept like this
throuh the wood and lay down." (He suddenly lay down on his stomach
with a supple movement to show how he had done it.) "One turned up and I
rabbed him, like this." (He jumped up quickly and lihtly.) "'Come
alon to the colonel,' I said. He starts yellin, and suddenly there
were four of them. They rushed at me with their little swords. So I went
for them with my ax, this way: 'What are you up to?' says I. 'Christ be
with you!'" shouted Tikhon, wavin his arms with an anry scowl and
throwin out his chest.

"Yes, we saw from the hill how you took to your heels throuh the
puddles!" said the esaul, screwin up his litterin eyes.

Petya badly wanted to lauh, but noticed that they all refrained from
lauhin. He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon's face to the esaul's
and Denisov's, unable to make out what it all meant.

"Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, couhin anrily. "Why didn't you
bwin the first one?"

Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,
then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beamin, foolish rin,
disclosin a ap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was called
Shcherbaty--the ap-toothed). Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into a
peal of merry lauhter in which Tikhon himself joined.

"Oh, but he was a reular ood-for-nothin," said Tikhon. "The clothes
on him--poor stuff! How could I brin him? And so rude, your honor! Why,
he says: 'I'm a eneral's son myself, I won't o!' he says."

"You are a bwute!" said Denisov. "I wanted to question..."

"But I questioned him," said Tikhon. "He said he didn't know much.
'There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff--only soldiers in
name,' he says. 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll take them
all,'" Tikhon concluded, lookin cheerfully and resolutely into
Denisov's eyes.

"I'll ive you a hundwed sharp lashes--that'll teach you to play the
fool!" said Denisov severely.

"But why are you anry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'd never seen
your Frenchmen! Only wait till it ets dark and I'll fetch you any of
them you want--three if you like."

"Well, let's o," said Denisov, and rode all the way to the watchhouse
in silence and frownin anrily.

Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks lauhin with him
and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.

When the fit of lauhter that had seized him at Tikhon's words and smile
had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed a
man, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felt
a pan in his heart. But this uneasiness lasted only a moment. He felt
it necessary to hold his head hiher, to brace himself, and to question
the esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow's undertakin, that
he miht not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself.

The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way with the
news that Dolokhov was soon comin and that all was well with him.

Denisov at once cheered up and, callin Petya to him, said: "Well, tell
me about yourself."




CHAPTER VII

Petya, havin left his people after their departure from Moscow, joined
his reiment and was soon taken as orderly by a eneral commandin a
lare uerrilla detachment. From the time he received his commission,
and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in the
battle of Vyazma, Petya had been in a constant state of blissful
excitement at bein rown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not to
miss any chance to do somethin really heroic. He was hihly delihted
with what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time it
always seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were bein
performed just where he did not happen to be. And he was always in a
hurry to et where he was not.

When on the twenty-first of October his eneral expressed a wish to send
somebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya beed so piteously to be sent
that the eneral could not refuse. But when dispatchin him he recalled
Petya's mad action at the battle of Vyazma, where instead of ridin by
the road to the place to which he had been sent, he had alloped to the
advanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired his
pistol. So now the eneral explicitly forbade his takin part in any
action whatever of Denisov's. That was why Petya had blushed and rown
confused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay. Before they had
ridden to the outskirts of the forest Petya had considered he must carry
out his instructions strictly and return at once. But when he saw the
French and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be an
attack that niht, he decided, with the rapidity with which youn people
chane their views, that the eneral, whom he had reatly respected till
then, was a rubbishy erman, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero,
and Tikhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave
them at a moment of difficulty.

It was already rowin dusk when Denisov, Petya, and the esaul rode up
to the watchhouse. In the twiliht saddled horses could be seen, and
Cossacks and hussars who had ried up rouh shelters in the lade and
were kindlin lowin fires in a hollow of the forest where the French
could not see the smoke. In the passae of the small watchhouse a
Cossack with sleeves rolled up was choppin some mutton. In the room
three officers of Denisov's band were convertin a door into a tabletop.
Petya took off his wet clothes, ave them to be dried, and at once bean
helpin the officers to fix up the dinner table.

In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On the
table were vodka, a flask of rum, white bread, roast mutton, and salt.

Sittin at table with the officers and tearin the fat savory mutton
with his hands, down which the rease trickled, Petya was in an ecstatic
childish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence that
others loved him in the same way.

"So then what do you think, Vasili Dmitrich?" said he to Denisov. "It's
all riht my stayin a day with you?" And not waitin for a reply he
answered his own question: "You see I was told to find out--well, I am
findin out.... Only do let me into the very... into the chief... I
don't want a reward... But I want..."

Petya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwin back his head and
flourishin his arms.

"Into the vewy chief..." Denisov repeated with a smile.

"Only, please let me command somethin, so that I may really command..."
Petya went on. "What would it be to you?... Oh, you want a knife?" he
said, turnin to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.

And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it.

"Please keep it. I have several like it," said Petya, blushin.
"Heavens! I was quite forettin!" he suddenly cried. "I have some
raisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and he
has such capital thins. I bouht ten pounds. I am used to somethin
sweet. Would you like some?..." and Petya ran out into the passae to
his Cossack and brouht back some bas which contained about five pounds
of raisins. "Have some, entlemen, have some!"

"You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul. "I bouht a
capital one from our sutler! He has splendid thins. And he's very
honest, that's the chief thin. I'll be sure to send it to you. Or
perhaps your flints are ivin out, or are worn out--that happens
sometimes, you know. I have brouht some with me, here they are"--and he
showed a ba--"a hundred flints. I bouht them very cheap. Please take
as many as you want, or all if you like...."

Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Petya stopped and
blushed.

He tried to remember whether he had not done anythin else that was
foolish. And runnin over the events of the day he remembered the French
drummer boy. "It's capital for us here, but what of him? Where have they
put him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt his feelins?" he thouht.
But havin cauht himself sayin too much about the flints, he was now
afraid to speak out.

"I miht ask," he thouht, "but they'll say: 'He's a boy himself and so
he pities the boy.' I'll show them tomorrow whether I'm a boy. Will it
seem odd if I ask?" Petya thouht. "Well, never mind!" and immediately,
blushin and lookin anxiously at the officers to see if they appeared
ironical, he said:

"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and ive him somethin to
eat?... Perhaps..."

"Yes, he's a poor little fellow," said Denisov, who evidently saw
nothin shameful in this reminder. "Call him in. His name is Vincent
Bosse. Have him fetched."

"I'll call him," said Petya.

"Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow," Denisov repeated.

Petya was standin at the door when Denisov said this. He slipped in
between the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:

"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"

And havin kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut.

"Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stoppin outside the door.

"Who do you want, sir?" asked a voice in the darkness.

Petya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been captured that
day.

"Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.

Vincent, the boy's name, had already been chaned by the Cossacks into
Vesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers. In both
these adaptations the reference to sprin (vesna) matched the impression
made by the youn lad.

"He is warmin himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesenya! Vesenya!--
Vesenny!" lauhin voices were heard callin to one another in the
darkness.

"He's a smart lad," said an hussar standin near Petya. "We ave him
somethin to eat a while ao. He was awfully hunry!"

The sound of bare feet splashin throuh the mud was heard in the
darkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.

"Ah, c'est vous!" said Petya. "Voulez-vous maner? N'ayez pas peur, on
ne vous fera pas de mal," * he added shyly and affectionately, touchin
the boy's hand. "Entrez, entrez." *(2)


* "Ah, it's you! Do you want somethin to eat? Don't be afraid, they
won't hurt you."

* (2) "Come in, come in."

"Merci, monsieur," * said the drummer boy in a tremblin almost childish
voice, and he bean scrapin his dirty feet on the threshold.


* "Thank you, sir."

There were many thins Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but did
not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passae. Then in
the darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it.

"Come in, come in!" he repeated in a entle whisper. "Oh, what can I do
for him?" he thouht, and openin the door he let the boy pass in first.

When the boy had entered the hut, Petya sat down at a distance from him,
considerin it beneath his dinity to pay attention to him. But he
finered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seem
ridiculous to ive some to the drummer boy.




CHAPTER VIII

The arrival of Dolokhov diverted Petya's attention from the drummer boy,
to whom Denisov had had some mutton and vodka iven, and whom he had had
dressed in a Russian coat so that he miht be kept with their band and
not sent away with the other prisoners. Petya had heard in the army many
stories of Dolokhov's extraordinary bravery and of his cruelty to the
French, so from the moment he entered the hut Petya did not take his
eyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his head
hih, that he miht not be unworthy even of such company.

Dolokhov's appearance amazed Petya by its simplicity.

Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas the
Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speakin and everythin he
did indicated his unusual position. But Dolokhov, who in Moscow had worn
a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer of
the uards. He was clean-shaven and wore a uardsman's padded coat with
an Order of St. eore at his buttonhole and a plain forae cap set
straiht on his head. He took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of the
room, and without reetin anyone went up to Denisov and bean
questionin him about the matter in hand. Denisov told him of the
desins the lare detachments had on the transport, of the messae Petya
had brouht, and his own replies to both enerals. Then he told him all
he knew of the French detachment.

"That's so. But we must know what troops they are and their numbers,"
said Dolokhov. "It will be necessary to o there. We can't start the
affair without knowin for certain how many there are. I like to work
accurately. Here now--wouldn't one of these entlemen like to ride over
to the French camp with me? I have brouht a spare uniform."

"I, I... I'll o with you!" cried Petya.

"There's no need for you to o at all," said Denisov, addressin
Dolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him o on any account."

"I like that!" exclaimed Petya. "Why shouldn't I o?"

"Because it's useless."

"Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall o, and that's
all. You'll take me, won't you?" he said, turnin to Dolokhov.

"Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizin the face of the
French drummer boy. "Have you had that younster with you lon?" he
asked Denisov.

"He was taken today but he knows nothin. I'm keepin him with me."

"Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov.

"Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them," shouted Denisov,
suddenly flushin. "And I say boldly that I have not a sinle man's life
on my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to send thirty or thwee
hundwed men to town under escort, instead of stainin--I speak bluntly--
stainin the honor of a soldier?"

"That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this youn count of
sixteen," said Dolokhov with cold irony, "but it's time for you to drop
it."

"Why, I've not said anythin! I only say that I'll certainly o with
you," said Petya shyly.

"But for you and me, old fellow, it's time to drop these amenities,"
continued Dolokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speakin of
this subject which irritated Denisov. "Now, why have you kept this lad?"
he went on, swayin his head. "Because you are sorry for him! Don't we
know those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred men away, and thirty
et there. The rest either starve or et killed. So isn't it all the
same not to send them?"

The esaul, screwin up his liht-colored eyes, nodded approvinly.

"That's not the point. I'm not oin to discuss the matter. I do not
wish to take it on my conscience. You say they'll die. All wiht. Only
not by my fault!"

Dolokhov bean lauhin.

"Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But if
they did catch me they'd strin me up to an aspen tree, and with all
your chivalry just the same." He paused. "However, we must et to work.
Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniforms in it.
Well, are you comin with me?" he asked Petya.

"I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushin almost to tears and
lancin at Denisov.

While Dolokhov had been disputin with Denisov what should be done with
prisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; but aain he
had no time to rasp fully what they were talkin about. "If rown-up,
distinuished men think so, it must be necessary and riht," thouht he.
"But above all Denisov must not dare to imaine that I'll obey him and
that he can order me about. I will certainly o to the French camp with
Dolokhov. If he can, so can I!"

And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too was
accustomed to do everythin accurately and not just anyhow, and that he
never considered personal daner.

"For you'll admit that if we don't know for sure how many of them there
are... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there are only two of
us. Besides, I want to o very much and certainly will o, so don't
hinder me," said he. "It will only make thins worse..."




CHAPTER IX

Havin put on French reatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhov rode to
the clearin from which Denisov had reconnoitered the French camp, and
emerin from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into the
hollow. On reachin the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacks accompanyin
him to await him there and rode on at a quick trot alon the road to the
bride. Petya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side.

"If we're cauht, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol," whispered
he.

"Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and at that
very moment they heard throuh the darkness the challene: "Qui vive?" *
and the click of a musket.


* "Who oes there?"

The blood rushed to Petya's face and he rasped his pistol.

"Lanciers du 6-me," * replied Dolokhov, neither hastenin nor slackenin
his horse's pace.


* "Lancers of the 6th Reiment."

The black fiure of a sentinel stood on the bride.

"Mot d'ordre." *


* "Password."

Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.

"Dites donc, le colonel erard est ici?" * he asked.


* "Tell me, is Colonel erard here?"

"Mot d'ordre," repeated the sentinel, barrin the way and not replyin.

"Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas le
mot d'ordre..." cried Dolokhov suddenly flarin up and ridin straiht
at the sentinel. "Je vous demande si le colonel est ici." *


* "When an officer is makin his round, sentinels don't ask him for the
password.... I am askin you if the colonel is here."

And without waitin for an answer from the sentinel, who had stepped
aside, Dolokhov rode up the incline at a walk.

Noticin the black outline of a man crossin the road, Dolokhov stopped
him and inquired where the commander and officers were. The man, a
soldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close up to
Dolokhov's horse, touched it with his hand, and explained simply and in
a friendly way that the commander and the officers were hiher up the
hill to the riht in the courtyard of the farm, as he called the
landowner's house.

Havin ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could be
heard around the campfires, Dolokhov turned into the courtyard of the
landowner's house. Havin ridden in, he dismounted and approached a bi
blazin campfire, around which sat several men talkin noisily.
Somethin was boilin in a small cauldron at the ede of the fire and a
soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, was
kneelin beside it stirrin its contents with a ramrod.

"Oh, he's a hard nut to crack," said one of the officers who was sittin
in the shadow at the other side of the fire.

"He'll make them et a move on, those fellows!" said another, lauhin.

Both fell silent, peerin out throuh the darkness at the sound of
Dolokhov's and Petya's steps as they advanced to the fire leadin their
horses.

"Bonjour, messieurs!" * said Dolokhov loudly and clearly.


* "ood day, entlemen."

There was a stir amon the officers in the shadow beyond the fire, and
one tall, lon-necked officer, walkin round the fire, came up to
Dolokhov.

"Is that you, Clement?" he asked. "Where the devil...?" But, noticin
his mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, reeted Dolokhov as a
straner, askin what he could do for him.

Dolokhov said that he and his companion were tryin to overtake their
reiment, and addressin the company in eneral asked whether they knew
anythin of the 6th Reiment. None of them knew anythin, and Petya
thouht the officers were beinnin to look at him and Dolokhov with
hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent.

"If you were countin on the evenin soup, you have come too late," said
a voice from behind the fire with a repressed lauh.

Dolokhov replied that they were not hunry and must push on farther that
niht.

He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirrin the pot and
squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the lon
neck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and aain asked
to what reiment he beloned. Dolokhov, as if he had not heard the
question, did not reply, but lihtin a short French pipe which he took
from his pocket bean askin the officer in how far the road before them
was safe from Cossacks.

"Those briands are everywhere," replied an officer from behind the
fire.

Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a daner only to stralers
such as his companion and himself, "but probably they would not dare to
attack lare detachments?" he added inquirinly. No one replied.

"Well, now he'll come away," Petya thouht every moment as he stood by
the campfire listenin to the talk.

But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and bean
puttin direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,
how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Askin about the Russian
prisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:

"A horrid business drain these corpses about with one! It would be
better to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud lauhter, so strane
that Petya thouht the French would immediately detect their disuise,
and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.

No one replied a word to Dolokhov's lauhter, and a French officer whom
they could not see (he lay wrapped in a reatcoat) rose and whispered
somethin to a companion. Dolokhov ot up and called to the soldier who
was holdin their horses.

"Will they brin our horses or not?" thouht Petya, instinctively
drawin nearer to Dolokhov.

The horses were brouht.

"ood evenin, entlemen," said Dolokhov.

Petya wished to say "ood niht" but could not utter a word. The
officers were whisperin toether. Dolokhov was a lon time mountin his
horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at a
footpace. Petya rode beside him, lonin to look round to see whether or
not the French were runnin after them, but not darin to.

Comin out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the open
country, but throuh the villae. At one spot he stopped and listened.
"Do you hear?" he asked. Petya reconized the sound of Russian voices
and saw the dark fiures of Russian prisoners round their campfires.
When they had descended to the bride Petya and Dolokhov rode past the
sentinel, who without sayin a word paced morosely up and down it, then
they descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them.

"Well now, ood-by. Tell Denisov, 'at the first shot at daybreak,'" said
Dolokhov and was about to ride away, but Petya seized hold of him.

"Really!" he cried, "you are such a hero! Oh, how fine, how splendid!
How I love you!"

"All riht, all riht!" said Dolokhov. But Petya did not let o of him
and Dolokhov saw throuh the loom that Petya was bendin toward him and
wanted to kiss him. Dolokhov kissed him, lauhed, turned his horse, and
vanished into the darkness.




CHAPTER X

Havin returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in the
passae. He was awaitin Petya's return in a state of aitation,
anxiety, and self-reproach for havin let him o.

"Thank od!" he exclaimed. "Yes, thank od!" he repeated, listenin to
Petya's rapturous account. "But, devil take you, I haven't slept because
of you! Well, thank od. Now lie down. We can still et a nap before
mornin."

"But... no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet. Besides I know
myself, if I fall asleep it's finished. And then I am used to not
sleepin before a battle."

He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recallin the details of his
expedition and vividly picturin to himself what would happen next day.

Then, noticin that Denisov was asleep, he rose and went out of doors.

It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops were still
fallin from the trees. Near the watchman's hut the black shapes of the
Cossacks' shanties and of horses tethered toether could be seen. Behind
the hut the dark shapes of the two waons with their horses beside them
were discernible, and in the hollow the dyin campfire leamed red. Not
all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid the
sounds of fallin drops and the munchin of the horses near by, could be
heard low voices which seemed to be whisperin.

Petya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the waons.
Someone was snorin under them, and around them stood saddled horses
munchin their oats. In the dark Petya reconized his own horse, which
he called "Karabakh" thouh it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it.

"Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he, sniffin its
nostrils and kissin it.

"Why aren't you asleep, sir?" said a Cossack who was sittin under a
waon.

"No, ah... Likhachev--isn't that your name? Do you know I have only just
come back! We've been into the French camp."

And Petya ave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his ride but
also of his object, and why he considered it better to risk his life
than to act "just anyhow."

"Well, you should et some sleep now," said the Cossack.

"No, I am used to this," said Petya. "I say, aren't the flints in your
pistols worn out? I brouht some with me. Don't you want any? You can
have some."

The Cossack bent forward from under the waon to et a closer look at
Petya.

"Because I am accustomed to doin everythin accurately," said Petya.
"Some fellows do thins just anyhow, without preparation, and then
they're sorry for it afterwards. I don't like that."

"Just so," said the Cossack.

"Oh yes, another thin! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen my
saber for me? It's ot bl..." (Petya feared to tell a lie, and the saber
never had been sharpened.) "Can you do it?"

"Of course I can."

Likhachev ot up, rummaed in his pack, and soon Petya heard the warlike
sound of steel on whetstone. He climbed onto the waon and sat on its
ede. The Cossack was sharpenin the saber under the waon.

"I say! Are the lads asleep?" asked Petya.

"Some are, and some aren't--like us."

"Well, and that boy?"

"Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passae. Fast asleep
after his friht. He was that lad!"

After that Petya remained silent for a lon time, listenin to the
sounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black fiure appeared.

"What are you sharpenin?" asked a man comin up to the waon.

"Why, this entleman's saber."

"That's riht," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar. "Was the
cup left here?"

"There, by the wheel!"

The hussar took the cup.

"It must be dayliht soon," said he, yawnin, and went away.

Petya ouht to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov's
uerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sittin on a waon
captured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that under
it Likhachev was sittin sharpenin a saber for him, that the bi dark
blotch to the riht was the watchman's hut, and the red blotch below to
the left was the dyin embers of a campfire, that the man who had come
for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew nor
waited to know anythin of all this. He was in a fairy kindom where
nothin resembled reality. The bi dark blotch miht really be the
watchman's hut or it miht be a cavern leadin to the very depths of the
earth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it miht be the eye of an
enormous monster. Perhaps he was really sittin on a waon, but it miht
very well be that he was not sittin on a waon but on a terribly hih
tower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or a
whole month, or o on fallin and never reach the bottom. Perhaps it was
just the Cossack, Likhachev, who was sittin under the waon, but it
miht be the kindest, bravest, most wonderful, most splendid man in the
world, whom no one knew of. It miht really have been that the hussar
came for water and went back into the hollow, but perhaps he had simply
vanished--disappeared altoether and dissolved into nothinness.

Nothin Petya could have seen now would have surprised him. He was in a
fairy kindom where everythin was possible.

He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.
It was clearin, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftly
sailin as if unveilin the stars. Sometimes it looked as if the clouds
were passin, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimes it seemed as if
the black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemed to be risin
hih, hih overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one could
touch it with one's hand.

Petya's eyes bean to close and he swayed a little.

The trees were drippin. Quiet talkin was heard. The horses neihed and
jostled one another. Someone snored.

"Ozhe-zhe, Ozhe-zhe..." hissed the saber aainst the whetstone, and
suddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playin some unknown,
sweetly solemn hymn. Petya was as musical as Natasha and more so than
Nicholas, but had never learned music or thouht about it, and so the
melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularly
fresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melody
rew and passed from one instrument to another. And what was played was
a fuue--thouh Petya had not the least conception of what a fuue is.
Each instrument--now resemblin a violin and now a horn, but better and
clearer than violin or horn--played its own part, and before it had
finished the melody mered with another instrument that bean almost the
same air, and then with a third and a fourth; and they all blended into
one and aain became separate and aain blended, now into solemn church
music, now into somethin dazzlinly brilliant and triumphant.

"Oh--why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurched
forward. "It's in my ears. But perhaps it's music of my own. Well, o
on, my music! Now!..."

He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, sounds
fluttered, rew into harmonies, separated, blended, and aain all
minled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. "Oh, this is delihtful! As
much as I like and as I like!" said Petya to himself. He tried to
conduct that enormous orchestra.

"Now softly, softly die away!" and the sounds obeyed him. "Now fuller,
more joyful. Still more and more joyful!" And from an unknown depth rose
increasinly triumphant sounds. "Now voices join in!" ordered Petya. And
at first from afar he heard men's voices and then women's. The voices
rew in harmonious triumphant strenth, and Petya listened to their
surpassin beauty in awe and joy.

With a solemn triumphal march there minled a son, the drip from the
trees, and the hissin of the saber, "Ozhe-zhe-zhe..." and aain the
horses jostled one another and neihed, not disturbin the choir but
joinin in it.

Petya did not know how lon this lasted: he enjoyed himself all the
time, wondered at his enjoyment and reretted that there was no one to
share it. He was awakened by Likhachev's kindly voice.

"It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"

Petya woke up.

"It's ettin liht, it's really ettin liht!" he exclaimed.

The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to their
very tails, and a watery liht showed itself throuh the bare branches.
Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and ave it
to Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed it.
The Cossacks were untyin their horses and tihtenin their saddle
irths.

"And here's the commander," said Likhachev.

Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, havin called Petya, ave
orders to et ready.




CHAPTER XI

The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tihtened
their saddle irths, and formed companies. Denisov stood by the
watchman's hut ivin final orders. The infantry of the detachment
passed alon the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mist
of early dawn, hundreds of feet splashin throuh the mud. The esaul
ave some orders to his men. Petya held his horse by the bridle,
impatiently awaitin the order to mount. His face, havin been bathed in
cold water, was all alow, and his eyes were particularly brilliant.
Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically.

"Well, is ev'wythin weady?" asked Denisov. "Bwin the horses."

The horses were brouht. Denisov was anry with the Cossack because the
saddle irths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted. Petya put his
foot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if to nip his le, but
Petya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weiht and,
turnin to look at the hussars startin in the darkness behind him, rode
up to Denisov.

"Vasili Dmitrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... for od's
sake...!" said he.

Denisov seemed to have forotten Petya's very existence. He turned to
lance at him.

"I ask one thin of you," he said sternly, "to obey me and not shove
yourself forward anywhere."

He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all the way.
When they had come to the ede of the forest it was noticeably rowin
liht over the field. Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and the
Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov. When they had all ridden by,
Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill. Slippin onto their
haunches and slidin, the horses descended with their riders into the
ravine. Petya rode beside Denisov, the pulsation of his body constantly
increasin. It was ettin lihter and lihter, but the mist still hid
distant objects. Havin reached the valley, Denisov looked back and
nodded to a Cossack beside him.

"The sinal!" said he.

The Cossack raised his arm and a shot ran out. In an instant the tramp
of horses allopin forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,
and then more shots.

At the first sound of tramplin hoofs and shoutin, Petya lashed his
horse and loosenin his rein alloped forward, not heedin Denisov who
shouted at him. It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was fired
it suddenly became as briht as noon. He alloped to the bride.
Cossacks were allopin alon the road in front of him. On the bride he
collided with a Cossack who had fallen behind, but he alloped on. In
front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were runnin from riht to
left across the road. One of them fell in the mud under his horse's
feet.

Cossacks were crowdin about a hut, busy with somethin. From the midst
of that crowd terrible screams arose. Petya alloped up, and the first
thin he saw was the pale face and tremblin jaw of a Frenchman,
clutchin the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.

"Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!" shouted Petya, and ivin rein to his
excited horse he alloped forward alon the villae street.

He could hear shootin ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and raed
Russian prisoners, who had come runnin from both sides of the road,
were shoutin somethin loudly and incoherently. A allant-lookin
Frenchman, in a blue overcoat, capless, and with a frownin red face,
had been defendin himself aainst the hussars. When Petya alloped up
the Frenchman had already fallen. "Too late aain!" flashed throuh
Petya's mind and he alloped on to the place from which the rapid firin
could be heard. The shots came from the yard of the landowner's house he
had visited the niht before with Dolokhov. The French were makin a
stand there behind a wattle fence in a arden thickly overrown with
bushes and were firin at the Cossacks who crowded at the ateway.
Throuh the smoke, as he approached the ate, Petya saw Dolokhov, whose
face was of a pale-reenish tint, shoutin to his men. "o round! Wait
for the infantry!" he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him.

"Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!" shouted Petya, and without pausin a moment
alloped to the place whence came the sounds of firin and where the
smoke was thickest.

A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashed
aainst somethin. The Cossacks and Dolokhov alloped after Petya into
the ateway of the courtyard. In the dense waverin smoke some of the
French threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet the
Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. Petya was
allopin alon the courtyard, but instead of holdin the reins he waved
both his arms about rapidly and stranely, slippin farther and farther
to one side in his saddle. His horse, havin alloped up to a campfire
that was smolderin in the mornin liht, stopped suddenly, and Petya
fell heavily on to the wet round. The Cossacks saw that his arms and
les jerked rapidly thouh his head was quite motionless. A bullet had
pierced his skull.

After speakin to the senior French officer, who came out of the house
with a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced that they
surrendered, Dolokhov dismounted and went up to Petya, who lay
motionless with outstretched arms.

"Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the ate to meet Denisov
who was ridin toward him.

"Killed?" cried Denisov, reconizin from a distance the unmistakably
lifeless attitude--very familiar to him--in which Petya's body was
lyin.

"Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these words
afforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who were
surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. "We won't take them!" he
called out to Denisov.

Denisov did not reply; he rode up to Petya, dismounted, and with
tremblin hands turned toward himself the bloodstained, mud-bespattered
face which had already one white.

"I am used to somethin sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!" he
recalled Petya's words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at the
sound, like the yelp of a do, with which Denisov turned away, walked to
the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.

Amon the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov was Pierre
Bezukhov.




CHAPTER XII

Durin the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had been
issued by the French authorities concernin the party of prisoners amon
whom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that party was no
loner with the same troops and baae trains with which it had left
Moscow. Half the waons laden with hardtack that had traveled the first
staes with them had been captured by Cossacks, the other half had one
on ahead. Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched in
front of the prisoners was left; they had all disappeared. The artillery
the prisoners had seen in front of them durin the first days was now
replaced by Marshal Junot's enormous baae train, convoyed by
Westphalians. Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baae train.

From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved in three
columns, went on as a sinle roup. The symptoms of disorder that Pierre
had noticed at their first haltin place after leavin Moscow had now
reached the utmost limit.

The road alon which they moved was bordered on both sides by dead
horses; raed men who had fallen behind from various reiments
continually chaned about, now joinin the movin column, now aain
lain behind it.

Several times durin the march false alarms had been iven and the
soldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and run
headlon, crushin one another, but had afterwards reassembled and
abused each other for their causeless panic.

These three roups travelin toether--the cavalry stores, the convoy of
prisoners, and Junot's baae train--still constituted a separate and
united whole, thouh each of the roups was rapidly meltin away.

Of the artillery baae train which had consisted of a hundred and
twenty waons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had been
captured or left behind. Some of Junot's waons also had been captured
or abandoned. Three waons had been raided and robbed by stralers from
Davout's corps. From the talk of the ermans Pierre learned that a
larer uard had been allotted to that baae train than to the
prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a erman soldier, had been
shot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoon belonin to the
marshal had been found in his possession.

The roup of prisoners had melted away most of all. Of the three hundred
and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred now
remained. The prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even the
cavalry saddles or Junot's baae. They understood that the saddles and
Junot's spoon miht be of some use, but that cold and hunry soldiers
should have to stand and uard equally cold and hunry Russians who
froze and laed behind on the road (in which case the order was to
shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revoltin. And the
escort, as if afraid, in the rievous condition they themselves were in,
of ivin way to the pity they felt for the prisoners and so renderin
their own pliht still worse, treated them with particular moroseness
and severity.

At Doroobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after lockin the
prisoners in a stable, had one off to pillae their own stores, several
of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but were
recaptured by the French and shot.

The arranement adopted when they started, that the officer prisoners
should be kept separate from the rest, had lon since been abandoned.
All who could walk went toether, and after the third stae Pierre had
rejoined Karataev and the ray-blue bandy-leed do that had chosen
Karataev for its master.

On the third day after leavin Moscow Karataev aain fell ill with the
fever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as he rew
radually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not know why, but
since Karataev had beun to row weaker it had cost him an effort to o
near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moanin with which
Karataev enerally lay down at the haltin places, and when he smelled
the odor emanatin from him which was now stroner than before, Pierre
moved farther away and did not think about him.

While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellect
but with his whole bein, by life itself, that man is created for
happiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simple
human needs, and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from
superfluity. And now durin these last three weeks of the march he had
learned still another new, consolatory truth--that nothin in this world
is terrible. He had learned that as there is no condition in which man
can be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which he
need be unhappy and lack freedom. He learned that sufferin and freedom
have their limits and that those limits are very near toether; that the
person in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as
he now, sleepin on the bare damp earth with one side rowin chilled
while the other was warmin; and that when he had put on tiht dancin
shoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feet
that were covered with sores--his footear havin lon since fallen to
pieces. He discovered that when he had married his wife--of his own free
will as it had seemed to him--he had been no more free than now when
they locked him up at niht in a stable. Of all that he himself
subsequently termed his sufferins, but which at the time he scarcely
felt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, and scab-covered feet.
(The horseflesh was appetizin and nourishin, the saltpeter flavor of
the unpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was no
reat cold, it was always warm walkin in the daytime, and at niht
there were the campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.)
The one thin that was at first hard to bear was his feet.

After the second day's march Pierre, havin examined his feet by the
campfire, thouht it would be impossible to walk on them; but when
everybody ot up he went alon, limpin, and, when he had warmed up,
walked without feelin the pain, thouh at niht his feet were more
terrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,
but thouht of other thins.

Only now did Pierre realize the full strenth of life in man and the
savin power he has of transferrin his attention from one thin to
another, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allows
superfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.

He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who laed
behind, thouh more than a hundred perished in that way. He did not
think of Karataev who rew weaker every day and evidently would soon
have to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think about himself. The
harder his position became and the more terrible the future, the more
independent of that position in which he found himself were the joyful
and comfortin thouhts, memories, and imainins that came to him.




CHAPTER XIII

At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was oin uphill alon
the muddy, slippery road, lookin at his feet and at the rouhness of
the way. Occasionally he lanced at the familiar crowd around him and
then aain at his feet. The former and the latter were alike familiar
and his own. The blue-ray bandy leed do ran merrily alon the side
of the road, sometimes in proof of its aility and self-satisfaction
liftin one hind le and hoppin alon on three, and then aain oin on
all four and rushin to bark at the crows that sat on the carrion. The
do was merrier and sleeker than it had been in Moscow. All around lay
the flesh of different animals--from men to horses--in various staes of
decomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passin men the
do could eat all it wanted.

It had been rainin since mornin and had seemed as if at any moment it
miht cease and the sky clear, but after a short break it bean rainin
harder than before. The saturated road no loner absorbed the water,
which ran alon the ruts in streams.

Pierre walked alon, lookin from side to side, countin his steps in
threes, and reckonin them off on his finers. Mentally addressin the
rain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, o on! Pelt harder!"

It seemed to him that he was thinkin of nothin, but far down and deep
within him his soul was occupied with somethin important and
comfortin. This somethin was a most subtle spiritual deduction from a
conversation with Karataev the day before.

At their yesterday's haltin place, feelin chilly by a dyin campfire,
Pierre had ot up and one to the next one, which was burnin better.
There Platon Karataev was sittin covered up--head and all--with his
reatcoat as if it were a vestment, tellin the soldiers in his
effective and pleasant thouh now feeble voice a story Pierre knew. It
was already past midniht, the hour when Karataev was usually free of
his fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached the fire and
heard Platon's voice enfeebled by illness, and saw his pathetic face
brihtly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. His
feelin of pity for this man frihtened him and he wished to o away,
but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, tryin not to look at
Platon.

"Well, how are you?" he asked.

"How am I? If we rumble at sickness, od won't rant us death," replied
Platon, and at once resumed the story he had beun.

"And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated face
and a particularly happy liht in his eyes, "you see, brother..."

Pierre had lon been familiar with that story. Karataev had told it to
him alone some half-dozen times and always with a specially joyful
emotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as to
somethin new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidently felt as he told
it communicated itself also to Pierre. The story was of an old merchant
who lived a ood and od-fearin life with his family, and who went once
to the Nizhni fair with a companion--a rich merchant.

Havin put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next mornin his
companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstained knife
was found under the old merchant's pillow. He was tried, knouted, and
his nostrils havin been torn off, "all in due form" as Karataev put it,
he was sent to hard labor in Siberia.

"And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "ten years
or more passed by. The old man was livin as a convict, submittin as he
should and doin no wron. Only he prayed to od for death. Well, one
niht the convicts were athered just as we are, with the old man amon
them. And they bean tellin what each was sufferin for, and how they
had sinned aainst od. One told how he had taken a life, another had
taken two, a third had set a house on fire, while another had simply
been a varant and had done nothin. So they asked the old man: 'What
are you bein punished for, Daddy?'--'I, my dear brothers,' said he, 'am
bein punished for my own and other men's sins. But I have not killed
anyone or taken anythin that was not mine, but have only helped my
poorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had much
property. 'And he went on to tell them all about it in due order. 'I
don't rieve for myself,' he says, 'od, it seems, has chastened me.
Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,' and the old man bean
to weep. Now it happened that in the roup was the very man who had
killed the other merchant. 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said. 'When,
and in what month?' He asked all about it and his heart bean to ache.
So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!
'You are perishin because of me, Daddy,' he says. 'It's quite true,
lads, that this man,' he says, 'is bein tortured innocently and for
nothin! I,' he says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under your
head while you were asleep. Forive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ's
sake!'"

Karataev paused, smilin joyously as he azed into the fire, and he drew
the los toether.

"And the old man said, 'od will forive you, we are all sinners in His
siht. I suffer for my own sins,' and he wept bitter tears. Well, and
what do you think, dear friends?" Karataev continued, his face
brihtenin more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now had
to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meanin of his story:
"What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed to the
authorities. 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a reat sinner),
'but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don't let him suffer
because of me.' So he confessed and it was all written down and the
papers sent off in due form. The place was a lon way off, and while
they were judin, what with one thin and another, fillin in the
papers all in due form--the authorities I mean--time passed. The affair
reached the Tsar. After a while the Tsar's decree came: to set the
merchant free and ive him a compensation that had been awarded. The
paper arrived and they bean to look for the old man. 'Where is the old
man who has been sufferin innocently and in vain? A paper has come from
the Tsar!' so they bean lookin for him," here Karataev's lower jaw
trembled, "but od had already foriven him--he was dead! That's how it
was, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sat for a lon time silent,
azin before him with a smile.

And Pierre's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itself
but by its mysterious sinificance: by the rapturous joy that lit up
Karataev's face as he told it, and the mystic sinificance of that joy.




CHAPTER XIV

"A vos places!" * suddenly cried a voice.


* "To your places."

A pleasant feelin of excitement and an expectation of somethin joyful
and solemn was aroused amon the soldiers of the convoy and the
prisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left came
smartly dressed cavalrymen on ood horses, passin the prisoners at a
trot. The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at the
approach of those in authority. The prisoners throned toether and were
pushed off the road. The convoy formed up.

"The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly had the
sleek cavalry passed, before a carriae drawn by six ray horses rattled
by. Pierre cauht a limpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with a
tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one of the
marshals. His eye fell on Pierre's lare and strikin fiure, and in the
expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thouht he
detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.

The eneral in chare of the stores alloped after the carriae with a
red and frihtened face, whippin up his skinny horse. Several officers
formed a roup and some soldiers crowded round them. Their faces all
looked excited and worried.

"What did he say? What did he say?" Pierre heard them ask.

While the marshal was passin, the prisoners had huddled toether in a
crowd, and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen that mornin. He
sat in his short overcoat leanin aainst a birch tree. On his face,
besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while tellin
the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now an
expression of quiet solemnity.

Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled with
tears, evidently wishin him to come near that he miht say somethin to
him. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself. He made as if he
did not notice that look and moved hastily away.

When the prisoners aain went forward Pierre looked round. Karataev was
still sittin at the side of the road under the birch tree and two
Frenchmen were talkin over his head. Pierre did not look round aain
but went limpin up the hill.

From behind, where Karataev had been sittin, came the sound of a shot.
Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered that he had
not yet finished reckonin up how many staes still remained to
Smolensk--a calculation he had beun before the marshal went by. And he
aain started reckonin. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one of
whom carried a lowered and smokin un. They both looked pale, and in
the expression on their faces--one of them lanced timidly at Pierre--
there was somethin resemblin what he had seen on the face of the youn
soldier at the execution. Pierre looked at the soldier and remembered
that, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while dryin it at
the fire and how they had lauhed at him.

Behind him, where Karataev had been sittin, the do bean to howl.
"What a stupid beast! Why is it howlin?" thouht Pierre.

His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walkin beside him, avoided lookin
back at the place where the shot had been fired and the do was howlin,
just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all their faces.




CHAPTER XV

The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baae train stopped at
the villae of Shamshevo. The men crowded toether round the campfires.
Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with his
back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. He aain slept as he had
done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.

Aain real events minled with dreams and aain someone, he or another,
ave expression to his thouhts, and even to the same thouhts that had
been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk.

"Life is everythin. Life is od. Everythin chanes and moves and that
movement is od. And while there is life there is joy in consciousness
of the divine. To love life is to love od. Harder and more blessed than
all else is to love this life in one's sufferins, in innocent
sufferins."

"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.

And suddenly he saw vividly before him a lon-forotten, kindly old man
who had iven him eoraphy lessons in Switzerland. "Wait a bit," said
the old man, and showed Pierre a lobe. This lobe was alive--a
vibratin ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surface consisted of
drops closely pressed toether, and all these drops moved and chaned
places, sometimes several of them merin into one, sometimes one
dividin into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much
space as possible, but others strivin to do the same compressed it,
sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes mered with it.

"That is life," said the old teacher.

"How simple and clear it is," thouht Pierre. "How is it I did not know
it before?"

"od is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect Him
to the reatest extent. And it rows, meres, disappears from the
surface, sinks to the depths, and aain emeres. There now, Karataev has
spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?" said the
teacher.

"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.

He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian
soldier away was squattin by the fire, enaed in roastin a piece of
meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy,
hairy, red hands with their short finers deftly turned the ramrod. His
brown morose face with frownin brows was clearly visible by the low of
the charcoal.

"It's all the same to him," he muttered, turnin quickly to a soldier
who stood behind him. "Briand! et away!"

And twistin the ramrod he looked loomily at Pierre, who turned away
and azed into the darkness. A prisoner, the Russian soldier the
Frenchman had pushed away, was sittin near the fire pattin somethin
with his hand. Lookin more closely Pierre reconized the blue-ray do,
sittin beside the soldier, wain its tail.

"Ah, he's come?" said Pierre. "And Plat-" he bean, but did not finish.

Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy--of
the look Platon had iven him as he sat under the tree, of the shot
heard from that spot, of the do's howl, of the uilty faces of the two
Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smokin un, and of
Karataev's absence at this halt--and he was on the point of realizin
that Karataev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew not
why, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evenin he had spent
with a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. And
without linkin up the events of the day or drawin a conclusion from
them, Pierre closed his eyes, seein a vision of the country in
summertime minled with memories of bathin and of the liquid, vibratin
lobe, and he sank into water so that it closed over his head.

Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firin.
French soldiers were runnin past him.

"The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd of
Russians surrounded Pierre.

For a lon time he could not understand what was happenin to him. All
around he heard his comrades sobbin with joy.

"Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlins!" old soldiers exclaimed, weepin, as
they embraced Cossacks and hussars.

The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offered them
clothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as he sat amon
them and could not utter a word. He hued the first soldier who
approached him, and kissed him, weepin.

Dolokhov stood at the ate of the ruined house, lettin a crowd of
disarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that had
happened, were talkin loudly amon themselves, but as they passed
Dolokhov who ently switched his boots with his whip and watched them
with cold lassy eyes that boded no ood, they became silent. On the
opposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, countin the prisoners and
markin off each hundred with a chalk line on the ate.

"How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack.

"The second hundred," replied the Cossack.

"Filez, filez!" * Dolokhov kept sayin, havin adopted this expression
from the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners they
flashed with a cruel liht.


* "et alon, et alon!"

Denisov, bareheaded and with a loomy face, walked behind some Cossacks
who were carryin the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that had been du
in the arden.




CHAPTER XVI

After the twenty-eihth of October when the frosts bean, the fliht of
the French assumed a still more traic character, with men freezin, or
roastin themselves to death at the campfires, while carriaes with
people dressed in furs continued to drive past, carryin away the
property that had been stolen by the Emperor, kins, and dukes; but the
process of the fliht and disinteration of the French army went on
essentially as before.

From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men not
reckonin the uards (who did nothin durin the whole war but pillae)
was reduced to thirty-six thousand, thouh not more than five thousand
had fallen in battle. From this beinnin the succeedin terms of the
proression could be determined mathematically. The French army melted
away and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyazma, from Vyazma to
Smolensk, from Smolensk to the Berezina, and from the Berezina to Vilna-
-independently of the reater or lesser intensity of the cold, the
pursuit, the barrin of the way, or any other particular conditions.
Beyond Vyazma the French army instead of movin in three columns huddled
toether into one mass, and so went on to the end. Berthier wrote to his
Emperor (we know how far commandin officers allow themselves to divere
from the truth in describin the condition of an army) and this is what
he said:

I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the various
corps I have had occasion to observe durin different staes of the last
two or three days' march. They are almost disbanded. Scarcely a quarter
of the soldiers remain with the standards of their reiments, the others
o off by themselves in different directions hopin to find food and
escape discipline. In eneral they reard Smolensk as the place where
they hope to recover. Durin the last few days many of the men have been
seen to throw away their cartrides and their arms. In such a state of
affairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of Your
Majesty's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk
and should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted
cavalry, unnecessary baae, and artillery material that is no loner
in proportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn out with
huner and fatiue, need these supplies as well as a few days' rest.
Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs. This
state of thins is continually becomin worse and makes one fear that
unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no loner be under
control in case of an enaement.

November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.

After staerin into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land, the
French, searchin for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,
and when everythin had been plundered fled farther.

They all went without knowin whither or why they were oin. Still less
did that enius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to him.
But still he and those about him retained their old habits: wrote
commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one another
sire, mon cousin, prince d'Eckmuhl, roi de Naples, and so on. But these
orders and reports were only on paper, nothin in them was acted upon
for they could not be carried out, and thouh they entitled one another
Majesties, Hihnesses, or Cousins, they all felt that they were
miserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to pay.
And thouh they pretended to be concerned about the army, each was
thinkin only of himself and of how to et away quickly and save
himself.




CHAPTER XVII

The movements of the Russian and French armies durin the campain from
Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a ame of Russian
blindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of them
occasionally rins a little bell to inform the catcher of his
whereabouts. First he rins his bell fearlessly, but when he ets into a
tiht place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinkin to
escape runs straiht into his opponent's arms.

At first while they were still movin alon the Kalua road, Napoleon's
armies made their presence known, but later when they reached the
Smolensk road they ran holdin the clapper of their bell tiht--and
often thinkin they were escapin ran riht into the Russians.

Owin to the rapidity of the French fliht and the Russian pursuit and
the consequent exhaustion of the horses, the chief means of
approximately ascertainin the enemy's position--by cavalry scoutin--
was not available. Besides, as a result of the frequent and rapid chane
of position by each army, even what information was obtained could not
be delivered in time. If news was received one day that the enemy had
been in a certain position the day before, by the third day when
somethin could have been done, that army was already two days' march
farther on and in quite another position.

One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolensk there were several
different roads available for the French, and one would have thouht
that durin their stay of four days they miht have learned where the
enemy was, miht have arraned some more advantaeous plan and
undertaken somethin new. But after a four days' halt the mob, with no
maneuvers or plans, aain bean runnin alon the beaten track, neither
to the riht nor to the left but alon the old--the worst--road, throuh
Krasnoe and Orsha.

Expectin the enemy from behind and not in front, the French separated
in their fliht and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours. In
front of them all fled the Emperor, then the kins, then the dukes. The
Russian army, expectin Napoleon to take the road to the riht beyond
the Dnieper--which was the only reasonable thin for him to do--
themselves turned to the riht and came out onto the hihroad at
Krasnoe. And here as in a ame of blindman's buff the French ran into
our vanuard. Seein their enemy unexpectedly the French fell into
confusion and stopped short from the sudden friht, but then they
resumed their fliht, abandonin their comrades who were farther behind.
Then for three days separate portions of the French army--first Murat's
(the vice-kin's), then Davout's, and then Ney's--ran, as it were, the
auntlet of the Russian army. They abandoned one another, abandoned all
their heavy baae, their artillery, and half their men, and fled,
ettin past the Russians by niht by makin semicircles to the riht.

Ney, who came last, had been busyin himself blowin up the walls of
Smolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunate
pliht of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floor
aainst which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of ten
thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left,
havin abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and havin crossed the
Dnieper at niht by stealth at a wooded spot.

From Orsha they fled farther alon the road to Vilna, still playin at
blindman's buff with the pursuin army. At the Berezina they aain
became disoranized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but those
who ot across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a fur
coat and, havin seated himself in a sleih, alloped on alone,
abandonin his companions. The others who could do so drove away too,
leavin those who could not to surrender or die.




CHAPTER XVIII

This campain consisted in a fliht of the French durin which they did
all they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto the
Kalua road to the day their leader fled from the army, none of the
movements of the crowd had any sense. So one miht have thouht that
reardin this period of the campain the historians, who attributed the
actions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found it
impossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory. But no!
Mountains of books have been written by the historians about this
campain, and everywhere are described Napoleon's arranements, the
maneuvers, and his profound plans which uided the army, as well as the
military enius shown by his marshals.

The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a well-
supplied district and the parallel road was open to him alon which
Kutuzov afterwards pursued him--this unnecessary retreat alon a
devastated road--is explained to us as bein due to profound
considerations. Similarly profound considerations are iven for his
retreat from Smolensk to Orsha. Then his heroism at Krasnoe is
described, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battle
and take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stick
and said:

"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le eneral," * but
nevertheless immediately ran away aain, abandonin to its fate the
scattered framents of the army he left behind.


* "I have acted the Emperor lon enouh; it is time to act the eneral."

Then we are told of the reatness of soul of the marshals, especially of
Ney--a reatness of soul consistin in this: that he made his way by
niht around throuh the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped to
Orsha, abandonin standards, artillery, and nine tenths of his men.

And lastly, the final departure of the reat Emperor from his heroic
army is presented to us by the historians as somethin reat and
characteristic of enius. Even that final runnin away, described in
ordinary lanuae as the lowest depth of baseness which every child is
tauht to be ashamed of--even that act finds justification in the
historians' lanuae.

When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historical
ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all that
humanity calls riht or even just, the historians produce a savin
conception of "reatness." "reatness," it seems, excludes the standards
of riht and wron. For the "reat" man nothin is wron, there is no
atrocity for which a "reat" man can be blamed.

"C'est rand!" * say the historians, and there no loner exists either
ood or evil but only "rand" and "not rand." rand is ood, not rand
is bad. rand is the characteristic, in their conception, of some
special animals called "heroes." And Napoleon, escapin home in a warm
fur coat and leavin to perish those who were not merely his comrades
but were (in his opinion) men he had brouht there, feels que c'est
rand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.


* "It is reat."

* (2) That it is reat.

"Du sublime (he saw somethin sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y a
qu'un pas," * said he. And the whole world for fifty years has been
repeatin: "Sublime! rand! Napoleon le rand!" Du sublime au ridicule
il n'y a qu'un pas.


* "From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step."

And it occurs to no one that to admit a reatness not commensurable with
the standard of riht and wron is merely to admit one's own nothinness
and immeasurable meanness.

For us with the standard of ood and evil iven us by Christ, no human
actions are incommensurable. And there is no reatness where simplicity,
oodness, and truth are absent.




CHAPTER XIX

What Russian, readin the account of the last part of the campain of
1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feelin of reret,
dissatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it is
that the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armies
surrounded them in superior numbers, when the disordered French, hunry
and freezin, surrendered in crowds, and when (as the historians relate)
the aim of the Russians was to stop the French, to cut them off, and
capture them all?

How was it that the Russian army, which when numerically weaker than the
French had iven battle at Borodino, did not achieve its purpose when it
had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capture
them? Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we had
surrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them? How could
that happen?

History (or what is called by that name) replyin to these questions
says that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichaov, and
this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers...

But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they were
uilty of not carryin out a prearraned plan were they not tried and
punished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichaov, and others
were the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensible
why, the position of the Russian army bein what it was at Krasnoe and
at the Berezina (in both cases we had superior forces), the French army
with its marshals, kins, and Emperor was not captured, if that was what
the Russians aimed at.

The explanation of this strane fact iven by Russian military
historians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,
for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attackin at
Vyazma and Tarutino.

Why was the Russian army--which with inferior forces had withstood the
enemy in full strenth at Borodino--defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezina
by the disoranized crowds of the French when it was numerically
superior?

If the aim of the Russians consisted in cuttin off and capturin
Napoleon and his marshals--and that aim was not merely frustrated but
all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled--then this last
period of the campain is quite rihtly considered by the French to be a
series of victories, and quite wronly considered victorious by Russian
historians.

The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims of
loic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyrical
rhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admit
that the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories for
Napoleon and defeats for Kutuzov.

But puttin national vanity entirely aside one feels that such a
conclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of French
victories brouht the French complete destruction, while the series of
Russian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and the
liberation of their country.

The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that the historians
studyin the events from the letters of the sovereins and the enerals,
from memoirs, reports, projects, and so forth, have attributed to this
last period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed, namely that of
cuttin off and capturin Napoleon with his marshals and his army.

There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have been
senseless and its attainment quite impossible.

It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon's disoranized army
was flyin from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, was
doin just what every Russian desired. So what was the use of performin
various operations on the French who were runnin away as fast as they
possibly could?

Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passae of men whose
whole enery was directed to fliht.

Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's own troops in
order to destroy the French army, which without external interference
was destroyin itself at such a rate that, thouh its path was not
blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actually
did in December, namely a hundredth part of the oriinal army.

Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive the
Emperor, kins, and dukes--whose capture would have been in the hihest
deree embarrassin for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists of
the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) reconized. Still more senseless
would have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when our
own army had melted away to half before reachin Krasnoe and a whole
division would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, and
when our men were not always ettin full rations and the prisoners
already taken were perishin of huner.

All the profound plans about cuttin off and capturin Napoleon and his
army were like the plan of a market ardener who, when drivin out of
his arden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, should
run to the ate and hit the cow on the head. The only thin to be said
in excuse of that ardener would be that he was very anry. But not even
that could be said for those who drew up this project, for it was not
they who had suffered from the trampled beds.

But besides the fact that cuttin off Napoleon with his army would have
been senseless, it was impossible.

It was impossible first because--as experience shows that a three-mile
movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans--the
probability of Chichaov, Kutuzov, and Wittenstein effectin a junction
on time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount to
impossibility, as in fact thouht Kutuzov, who when he received the plan
remarked that diversions planned over reat distances do not yield the
desired results.

Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum with which
Napoleon's army was retirin, incomparably reater forces than the
Russians possessed would have been required.

Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term "to cut off" has no
meanin. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army. To cut off
an army--to bar its road--is quite impossible, for there is always
plenty of room to avoid capture and there is the niht when nothin can
be seen, as the military scientists miht convince themselves by the
example of Krasnoe and of the Berezina. It is only possible to capture
prisoners if they aree to be captured, just as it is only possible to
catch a swallow if it settles on one's hand. Men can only be taken
prisoners if they surrender accordin to the rules of stratey and
tactics, as the ermans did. But the French troops quite rihtly did not
consider that this suited them, since death by huner and cold awaited
them in fliht or captivity alike.

Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the world
bean has a war been fouht under such conditions as those that obtained
in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained its
strenth to the utmost and could not have done more without destroyin
itself.

Durin the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it lost
fifty thousand sick or stralers, that is a number equal to the
population of a lare provincial town. Half the men fell out of the army
without a battle.

And it is of this period of the campain--when the army lacked boots and
sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and was
campin out at niht for months in the snow with fifteen derees of
frost, when there were only seven or eiht hours of dayliht and the
rest was niht in which the influence of discipline cannot be
maintained, when men were taken into that reion of death where
discipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but for
months, where they were every moment fihtin death from huner and
cold, when half the army perished in a sinle month--it is of this
period of the campain that the historians tell us how Miloradovich
should have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov to
another place, and Chichaov should have crossed (more than knee-deep in
snow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" and "cut off" the
French and so on and so on.

The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and should have been
done to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are not to blame
because other Russians, sittin in warm rooms, proposed that they should
do what was impossible.

All that strane contradiction now difficult to understand between the
facts and the historical accounts only arises because the historians
dealin with the matter have written the history of the beautiful words
and sentiments of various enerals, and not the history of the events.

To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interestin, and so do their
surmises and the rewards this or that eneral received; but the question
of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in raves
does not even interest them, for it does not come within the rane of
their investiation.

Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and eneral plans and
consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took a
direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insoluble
easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.

The aim of cuttin off Napoleon and his army never existed except in the
imainations of a dozen people. It could not exist because it was
senseless and unattainable.

The people had a sinle aim: to free their land from invasion. That aim
was attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away, and
so it was only necessary not to stop their fliht. Secondly it was
attained by the uerrilla warfare which was destroyin the French, and
thirdly by the fact that a lare Russian army was followin the French,
ready to use its strenth in case their movement stopped.

The Russian army had to act like a whip to a runnin animal. And the
experienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as a
menace than to strike the runnin animal on the head.

BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13




CHAPTER I

When seein a dyin animal a man feels a sense of horror: substance
similar to his own is perishin before his eyes. But when it is a
beloved and intimate human bein that is dyin, besides this horror at
the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, which
like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but always
aches and shrinks at any external irritatin touch.

After Prince Andrew's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felt this.
Droopin in spirit and closin their eyes before the menacin cloud of
death that overhun them, they dared not look life in the face. They
carefully uarded their open wounds from any rouh and painful contact.
Everythin: a carriae passin rapidly in the street, a summons to
dinner, the maid's inquiry what dress to prepare, or worse still any
word of insincere or feeble sympathy, seemed an insult, painfully
irritated the wound, interruptin that necessary quiet in which they
both tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that still
resounded in their imaination, and hindered their azin into those
mysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out before
them.

Only when alone toether were they free from such outrae and pain. They
spoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of very
unimportant matters.

Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of a
future seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully did
they avoid anythin relatin to him who was dead. It seemed to them that
what they had lived throuh and experienced could not be expressed in
words, and that any reference to the details of his life infrined the
majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished before
their eyes.

Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everythin
that miht lead up to the subject--this haltin on all sides at the
boundary of what they miht not mention--brouht before their minds with
still reater purity and clearness what they were both feelin.

But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.
Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independent arbiter of
her own fate and uardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first to
be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dwelt
for the first fortniht. She received letters from her relations to
which she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholas had been put
was damp and he bean to couh; Alpatych came to Yaroslavl with reports
on the state of their affairs and with advice and suestions that they
should return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvizhenka Street, which
had remained uninjured and needed only sliht repairs. Life did not
stand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for Princess
Mary to emere from the realm of secluded contemplation in which she had
lived till then, and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave
Natasha alone, yet the cares of life demanded her attention and she
involuntarily yielded to them. She went throuh the accounts with
Alpatych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and ave orders and
made preparations for the journey to Moscow.

Natasha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary bean makin
preparations for departure, held aloof from her too.

Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha o with her to Moscow,
and both parents ladly accepted this offer, for they saw their dauhter
losin strenth every day and thouht that a chane of scene and the
advice of Moscow doctors would be ood for her.

"I am not oin anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed to
her. "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room, with
difficulty refrainin from tears of vexation and irritation rather than
of sorrow.

After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her rief,
Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself, sittin huddled
up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearin and twistin
somethin with her slender nervous finers and azin intently and
fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. This solitude exhausted
and tormented her but she was in absolute need of it. As soon as anyone
entered she ot up quickly, chaned her position and expression, and
picked up a book or some sewin, evidently waitin impatiently for the
intruder to o.

She felt all the time as if she miht at any moment penetrate that on
which--with a terrible questionin too reat for her strenth--her
spiritual aze was fixed.

One day toward the end of December Natasha, pale and thin, dressed in a
black woolen own, her plaited hair neliently twisted into a knot, was
crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumplin and
smoothin out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of the
door.

She was azin in the direction in which he had one--to the other side
of life. And that other side of life, of which she had never before
thouht and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,
was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side of
life, where everythin was either emptiness and desolation or sufferin
and indinity.

She was azin where she knew him to be; but she could not imaine him
otherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him aain as he had been
at Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.

She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own, and
sometimes devised other words they miht have spoken.

There he is lyin back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leanin his
head on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and his
shoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes litter, and a
wrinkle comes and oes on his pale forehead. One of his les twitches
just perceptibly, but rapidly. Natasha knows that he is strulin with
terrible pain. "What is that pain like? Why does he have that pain? What
does he feel? How does it hurt him?" thouht Natasha. He noticed her
watchin him, raised his eyes, and bean to speak seriously:

"One thin would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forever to a
sufferin man. It would be continual torture." And he looked searchinly
at her. Natasha as usual answered before she had time to think what she
would say. She said: "This can't o on--it won't. You will et well--
quite well."

She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what she
had then felt. She recalled his lon sad and severe look at those words
and understood the meanin of the rebuke and despair in that protracted
aze.

"I areed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would be dreadful if
he always continued to suffer. I said it then only because it would have
been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thouht it
would be dreadful for me. He then still wished to live and feared death.
And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant. I
thouht quite differently. Had I said what I thouht, I should have
said: even if he had to o on dyin, to die continually before my eyes,
I should have been happy compared with what I am now. Now there is
nothin... nobody. Did he know that? No, he did not and never will know
it. And now it will never, never be possible to put it riht." And now
he aain seemed to be sayin the same words to her, only in her
imaination Natasha this time ave him a different answer. She stopped
him and said: "Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for me
there is nothin in life but you, and to suffer with you is the reatest
happiness for me," and he took her hand and pressed it as he had pressed
it that terrible evenin four days before his death. And in her
imaination she said other tender and lovin words which she miht have
said then but only spoke now: "I love thee!... thee! I love, love..."
she said, convulsively pressin her hands and settin her teeth with a
desperate effort...

She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already risin in her
eyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was sayin this. Aain
everythin was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and aain with a
strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. And now, now it
seemed to her she was penetratin the mystery.... But at the instant
when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealin itself to her a
loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears. Dunyasha,
her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frihtened look
on her face and showin no concern for her mistress.

"Come to your Papa at once, please!" said she with a strane, excited
look. "A misfortune... about Peter Ilynich... a letter," she finished
with a sob.




CHAPTER II

Besides a feelin of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feelin a
special estranement from the members of her own family. All of them--
her father, mother, and Sonya--were so near to her, so familiar, so
commonplace, that all their words and feelins seemed an insult to the
world in which she had been livin of late, and she felt not merely
indifferent to them but rearded them with hostility. She heard
Dunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did not rasp
them.

"What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just live
their own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thouht Natasha.

As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly comin out of her
mother's room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He had
evidently run out of that room to ive vent to the sobs that were
chokin him. When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairinly and
burst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face.

"Pe... Petya... o, o, she... is callin..." and weepin like a child
and quickly shufflin on his feeble les to a chair, he almost fell into
it, coverin his face with his hands.

Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run throuh Natasha's whole bein.
Terrible anuish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as if
somethin was bein torn inside her and she were dyin. But the pain was
immediately followed by a feelin of release from the oppressive
constraint that had prevented her takin part in life. The siht of her
father, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard throuh the
door, made her immediately foret herself and her own rief.

She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointin to her
mother's door. Princess Mary, pale and with quiverin chin, came out
from that room and takin Natasha by the arm said somethin to her.
Natasha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapid steps, pausin
at the door for an instant as if strulin with herself, and then ran
to her mother.

The countess was lyin in an armchair in a strane and awkward position,
stretchin out and beatin her head aainst the wall. Sonya and the
maids were holdin her arms.

"Natasha! Natasha!..." cried the countess. "It's not true... it's not
true... He's lyin... Natasha!" she shrieked, pushin those around her
away. "o away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!... ha, ha, ha!...
It's not true!"

Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embraced
her, and with unexpected strenth raised her, turned her face toward
herself, and clun to her.

"Mummy!... darlin!... I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept on
whisperin, not pausin an instant.

She did not let o of her mother but struled tenderly with her,
demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open her
mother's dress.

"My dearest darlin... Mummy, my precious!..." she whispered
incessantly, kissin her head, her hands, her face, and feelin her own
irrepressible and streamin tears ticklin her nose and cheeks.

The countess pressed her dauhter's hand, closed her eyes, and became
quiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,
lanced vacantly around her, and seein Natasha bean to press her
dauhter's head with all her strenth. Then she turned toward her
dauhter's face which was wincin with pain and azed lon at it.

"Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper. "Natasha,
you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"

Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there was
nothin but love and an entreaty for foriveness.

"My darlin Mummy!" she repeated, strainin all the power of her love to
find some way of takin on herself the excess of rief that crushed her
mother.

And aain in a futile strule with reality her mother, refusin to
believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloom
of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.

Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that niht, nor the
next day and niht. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother. Her
perseverin and patient love seemed completely to surround the countess
every moment, not explainin or consolin, but recallin her to life.

Durin the third niht the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,
and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,
but opened them aain on hearin the bedstead creak. The countess was
sittin up in bed and speakin softly.

"How lad I am you have come. You are tired. Won't you have some tea?"
Natasha went up to her. "You have improved in looks and rown more
manly," continued the countess, takin her dauhter's hand.

"Mamma! What are you sayin..."

"Natasha, he is no more, no more!"

And embracin her dauhter, the countess bean to weep for the first
time.




CHAPTER III

Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sonya and the count tried to
replace Natasha but could not. They saw that she alone was able to
restrain her mother from unreasonin despair. For three weeks Natasha
remained constantly at her mother's side, sleepin on a loune chair in
her room, makin her eat and drink, and talkin to her incessantly
because the mere sound of her tender, caressin tones soothed her
mother.

The mother's wounded spirit could not heal. Petya's death had torn from
her half her life. When the news of Petya's death had come she had been
a fresh and viorous woman of fifty, but a month later she left her room
a listless old woman takin no interest in life. But the same blow that
almost killed the countess, this second blow, restored Natasha to life.

A spiritual wound produced by a rendin of the spiritual body is like a
physical wound and, strane as it may seem, just as a deep wound may
heal and its edes join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yet
heal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.

Natasha's wound healed in that way. She thouht her life was ended, but
her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence of
life--love--was still active within her. Love awoke and so did life.

Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha toether;
this new sorrow brouht them still closer to one another. Princess Mary
put off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natasha as if
she had been a sick child. The last weeks passed in her mother's bedroom
had strained Natasha's physical strenth.

One afternoon noticin Natasha shiverin with fever, Princess Mary took
her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natasha lay down,
but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was oin away she
called her back.

"I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little."

"You are tired--try to sleep."

"No, no. Why did you brin me away? She will be askin for me."

"She is much better. She spoke so well today," said Princess Mary.

Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scanned
Princess Mary's face.

"Is she like him?" thouht Natasha. "Yes, like and yet not like. But she
is quite oriinal, strane, new, and unknown. And she loves me. What is
in her heart? All that is ood. But how? What is her mind like? What
does she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!"

"Mary," she said timidly, drawin Princess Mary's hand to herself,
"Mary, you mustn't think me wicked. No? Mary darlin, how I love you!
Let us be quite, quite friends."

And Natasha, embracin her, bean kissin her face and hands, makin
Princess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelins.

From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists only
between women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha. They
were continually kissin and sayin tender thins to one another and
spent most of their time toether. When one went out the other became
restless and hastened to rejoin her. Toether they felt more in harmony
with one another than either of them felt with herself when alone. A
feelin stroner than friendship spran up between them; an exclusive
feelin of life bein possible only in each other's presence.

Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were already
in bed they would bein talkin and o on till mornin. They spoke most
of what was lon past. Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of her
mother, her father, and her daydreams; and Natasha, who with a passive
lack of understandin had formerly turned away from that life of
devotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, now
feelin herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love her
past too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible to
her. She did not think of applyin submission and self-abneation to her
own life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood
and loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues. For
Princess Mary, listenin to Natasha's tales of childhood and early
youth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of
life: belief in life and its enjoyment.

Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as they
thouht) their exalted feelins by words; but this silence about him had
the effect of makin them radually bein to foret him without bein
conscious of it.

Natasha had rown thin and pale and physically so weak that they all
talked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she was
suddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,
and loss of ood looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare arm
carefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the mornin noticed her
drawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her lass. It seemed to
her that thins must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.

One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for oin down, and
then, testin her strenth, ran upstairs aain, observin the result.

Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled, so she called
aain--thouh she could hear Dunyasha comin--called her in the deep
chest tones in which she had been wont to sin, and listened attentively
to herself.

She did not know and would not have believed it, but beneath the layer
of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicate
youn shoots of rass were already sproutin, which takin root would so
cover with their livin verdure the rief that weihed her down that it
would soon no loner be seen or noticed. The wound had beun to heal
from within.

At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the count
insisted on Natasha's oin with her to consult the doctors.




CHAPTER IV

After the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to hold
back his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy and
so on, the farther movement of the fleein French, and of the Russians
who pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle. The
fliht was so rapid that the Russian army pursuin the French could not
keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and the
information received of the movements of the French was never reliable.

The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marchin
at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not o any
faster.

To realize the deree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is only
necessary to rasp clearly the meanin of the fact that, while not
losin more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino and
less than a hundred prisoners, the Russian army which left that place a
hundred thousand stron reached Krasnoe with only fifty thousand.

The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army
as the fliht of the French was to theirs. The only difference was that
the Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat of destruction
as hun over the French, and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind in
enemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were amon their own
people. The chief cause of the wastae of Napoleon's army was the
rapidity of its movement, and a convincin proof of this is the
correspondin decrease of the Russian army.

Kutuzov as far as was in his power, instead of tryin to check the
movement of the French as was desired in Petersbur and by the Russian
army enerals, directed his whole activity here, as he had done at
Tarutino and Vyazma, to hastenin it on while easin the movement of our
army.

But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the
army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident, another
reason for slackenin the pace and delayin presented itself to Kutuzov.
The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French. The road the
French would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod on
their heels the reater distance they had to cover. Only by followin at
some distance could one cut across the ziza path of the French. All
the artful maneuvers suested by our enerals meant fresh movements of
the army and a lenthenin of its marches, whereas the only reasonable
aim was to shorten those marches. To that end Kutuzov's activity was
directed durin the whole campain from Moscow to Vilna--not casually or
intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.

Kutuzov felt and knew--not by reasonin or science but with the whole of
his Russian bein--what every Russian soldier felt: that the French were
beaten, that the enemy was flyin and must be driven out; but at the
same time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march,
the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year.

But to the enerals, especially the forein ones in the Russian army,
who wished to distinuish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for some
reason to capture a kin or a duke--it seemed that now--when any battle
must be horrible and senseless--was the very time to fiht and conquer
somebody. Kutuzov merely shrued his shoulders when one after another
they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those soldiers--
ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved--who within a month and
without fihtin a battle had dwindled to half their number, and who at
the best if the fliht continued would have to o a reater distance
than they had already traversed, before they reached the frontier.

This lonin to distinuish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, and
to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on
the French army.

So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the three
French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen
thousand men. Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinous
encounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob of
French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three
days.

Toll wrote a disposition: "The first column will march to so and so,"
etc. And as usual nothin happened in accord with the disposition.
Prince Euene of Wurttember fired from a hill over the French crowds
that were runnin past, and demanded reinforcements which did not
arrive. The French, avoidin the Russians, dispersed and hid themselves
in the forest by niht, makin their way round as best they could, and
continued their fliht.

Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anythin about the
commissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when he
was wanted--that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled
himself--who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demandin
their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.


* Kniht without fear and without reproach.

"I ive you that column, lads," he said, ridin up to the troops and
pointin out the French to the cavalry.

And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urin on horses that could
scarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented to them-
-that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold, frost-bitten,
and starvin--and the column that had been presented to them threw down
its arms and surrendered as it had lon been anxious to do.

At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundred
cannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputed as to who
had distinuished himself and were pleased with their achievement--
thouh they much reretted not havin taken Napoleon, or at least a
marshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached one another and
especially Kutuzov for havin failed to do so.

These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools of the
most melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroes and
imained that they were accomplishin a most noble and honorable deed.
They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beinnin of the
campain he had prevented their vanquishin Napoleon, that he thouht of
nothin but satisfyin his passions and would not advance from the Linen
Factories because he was comfortable there, that at Krasnoe he checked
the advance because on learnin that Napoleon was there he had quite
lost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understandin
with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.

Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk in
this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as rand,
while Kutuzov is described by foreiners as a crafty, dissolute, weak
old courtier, and by Russians as somethin indefinite--a sort of puppet
useful only because he had a Russian name.




CHAPTER V

In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blunderin. The Emperor
was dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently written by order of
the Hihest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunnin court
liar, frihtened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders at
Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the lory of
complete victory over the French. *


* History of the year 1812. The character of Kutuzov and reflections on
the unsatisfactory results of the battles at Krasnoe, by Bodanovich.

Such is the fate not of reat men (rands hommes) whom the Russian mind
does not acknowlede, but of those rare and always solitary individuals
who, discernin the will of Providence, submit their personal will to
it. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discernin
the hiher laws.

For Russian historians, strane and terrible to say, Napoleon--that most
insinificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showed
human dinity--Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he is
rand. But Kutuzov--the man who from the beinnin to the end of his
activity in 1812, never once swervin by word or deed from Borodino to
Vilna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice and
a present consciousness of the future importance of what was happenin--
Kutuzov seems to them somethin indefinite and pitiful, and when
speakin of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little ashamed.

And yet it is difficult to imaine an historical character whose
activity was so unswervinly directed to a sinle aim; and it would be
difficult to imaine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the will
of the whole people. Still more difficult would it be to find an
instance in history of the aim of an historical personae bein so
completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts were
directed in 1812.

Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries lookin down from the
Pyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of what
he intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in eneral he said
nothin about himself, adopted no pose, always appeared to be the
simplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and most
ordinary thins. He wrote letters to his dauhters and to Madame de
Stael, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested with
enerals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those who tried
to prove anythin to him. When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bride
alloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for havin caused the
destruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promised not to abandon
Moscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shall not abandon
Moscow without a battle," thouh Moscow was then already abandoned. When
Arakcheev, comin to him from the Emperor, said that Ermolov ouht to be
appointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied: "Yes, I was just
sayin so myself," thouh a moment before he had said quite the
contrary. What did it matter to him--who then alone amid a senseless
crowd understood the whole tremendous sinificance of what was
happenin--what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed the
calamities of Moscow to him or to himself? Still less could it matter to
him who was appointed chief of the artillery.

Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man--who by
experience of life had reached the conviction that thouhts and the
words servin as their expression are not what move people--use quite
meaninless words that happened to enter his head.

But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once durin the whole
time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the sinle aim
toward which he moved throuhout the whole war. Obviously in spite of
himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his real
thouhts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.
Beinnin with the battle of Borodino, from which time his disareement
with those about him bean, he alone said that the battle of Borodino
was a victory, and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches and
reports up to the time of his death. He alone said that the loss of
Moscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply to Lauriston's proposal of
peace, he said: There can be no peace, for such is the people's will. He
alone durin the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are
useless, everythin is bein accomplished of itself better than we could
desire; that the enemy must be offered "a olden bride"; that neither
the Tarutino, the Vyazma, nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary; that
we must keep some force to reach the frontier with, and that he would
not sacrifice a sinle Russian for ten Frenchmen.

And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheev to
please the Emperor, he alone--incurrin thereby the Emperor's
displeasure--said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is
useless and harmful.

Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meanin of the
events. His actions--without the smallest deviation--were all directed
to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strenth for
conflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3) to drive them out
of Russia, minimizin as far as possible the sufferins of our people
and of our army.

This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time," this
enemy of decisive action, ave battle at Borodino, investin the
preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutuzov who before
the battle of Austerlitz bean said that it would be lost, he alone, in
contradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodino
was a victory, despite the assurance of enerals that the battle was
lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after
winnin a battle was unprecedented. He alone durin the whole retreat
insisted that battles, which were useless then, should not be fouht,
and that a new war should not be beun nor the frontiers of Russia
crossed.

It is easy now to understand the sinificance of these events--if only
we abstain from attributin to the activity of the mass aims that
existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals--for the events and
results now lie before us.

But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the eneral opinion,
so truly discern the importance of the people's view of the events that
in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?

The source of that extraordinary power of penetratin the meanin of the
events then occurin lay in the national feelin which he possessed in
full purity and strenth.

Only the reconition of the fact that he possessed this feelin caused
the people in so strane a manner, contrary to the Tsar's wish, to
select him--an old man in disfavor--to be their representative in the
national war. And only that feelin placed him on that hihest human
pedestal from which he, the commander-in-chief, devoted all his powers
not to slayin and destroyin men but to savin and showin pity on
them.

That simple, modest, and therefore truly reat, fiure could not be cast
in the false mold of a European hero--the supposed ruler of men--that
history has invented.

To a lackey no man can be reat, for a lackey has his own conception of
reatness.




CHAPTER VI

The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of
Krasnoe. Toward evenin--after much disputin and many mistakes made by
enerals who did not o to their proper places, and after adjutants had
been sent about with counterorders--when it had become plain that the
enemy was everywhere in fliht and that there could and would be no
battle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters
had that day been transferred.

The day was clear and frosty. Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little
white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented enerals who
whispered amon themselves behind his back. All alon the road roups of
French prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)
were crowdin to warm themselves at campfires. Near Dobroe an immense
crowd of tattered prisoners, buzzin with talk and wrapped and bandaed
in anythin they had been able to et hold of, were standin in the road
beside a lon row of unharnessed French uns. At the approach of the
commander-in-chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on
Kutuzov who, wearin a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat
that buled on his round shoulders, moved slowly alon the road on his
white horse. One of the enerals was reportin to him where the uns and
prisoners had been captured.

Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the eneral was
sayin. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he azed
attentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented a specially
wretched appearance. Most of them were disfiured by frost-bitten noses
and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festerin eyes.

One roup of the French stood close to the road, and two of them, one of
whom had his face covered with sores, were tearin a piece of raw flesh
with their hands. There was somethin horrible and bestial in the
fleetin lance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent
expression with which, after a lance at Kutuzov, the soldier with the
sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doin.

Kutuzov looked lon and intently at these two soldiers. He puckered his
face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. At another
spot he noticed a Russian soldier lauhinly pattin a Frenchman on the
shoulder, sayin somethin to him in a friendly manner, and Kutuzov with
the same expression on his face aain swayed his head.

"What were you sayin?" he asked the eneral, who continuin his report
directed the commander-in-chief's attention to some standards captured
from the French and standin in front of the Preobrazhensk reiment.

"Ah, the standards!" said Kutuzov, evidently detachin himself with
difficulty from the thouhts that preoccupied him.

He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were lookin at him from
all sides awaitin a word from him.

He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk reiment, sihed deeply, and
closed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carryin the
standards to advance and surround the commander-in-chief with them.
Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then, submittin with evident
reluctance to the duty imposed by his position, raised his head and
bean to speak. A thron of officers surrounded him. He looked
attentively around at the circle of officers, reconizin several of
them.

"I thank you all!" he said, addressin the soldiers and then aain the
officers. In the stillness around him his slowly uttered words were
distinctly heard. "I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.
The victory is complete and Russia will not foret you! Honor to you
forever."

He paused and looked around.

"Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who had accidentally
lowered the French eale he was holdin before the Preobrazhensk
standards. "Lower, lower, that's it. Hurrah lads!" he added, addressin
the men with a rapid movement of his chin.

"Hur-r-rah!" roared thousands of voices.

While the soldiers were shoutin Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddle
and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironic
leam.

"You see, brothers..." said he when the shouts had ceased... and all at
once his voice and the expression of his face chaned. It was no loner
the commander-in-chief speakin but an ordinary old man who wanted to
tell his comrades somethin very important.

There was a stir amon the thron of officers and in the ranks of the
soldiers, who moved that they miht hear better what he was oin to
say.

"You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't be helped!
Bear up; it won't be for lon now! We'll see our visitors off and then
we'll rest. The Tsar won't foret your service. It is hard for you, but
still you are at home while they--you see what they have come to," said
he, pointin to the prisoners. "Worse off than our poorest bears.
While they were stron we didn't spare ourselves, but now we may even
pity them. They are human beins too. Isn't it so, lads?"

He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wonderin aze fixed
upon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face rew brihter
and brihter with an old man's mild smile, which drew the corners of his
lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceased speakin and bowed
his head as if in perplexity.

"But after all who asked them here? Serves them riht, the bloody
bastards!" he cried, suddenly liftin his head.

And flourishin his whip he rode off at a allop for the first time
durin the whole campain, and left the broken ranks of the soldiers
lauhin joyfully and shoutin "Hurrah!"

Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops. No one could have
repeated the field marshal's address, beun solemnly and then chanin
into an old man's simplehearted talk; but the hearty sincerity of that
speech, the feelin of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foe
and consciousness of the justice of our cause, exactly expressed by that
old man's ood-natured expletives, was not merely understood but lay in
the soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and lon-
sustained shouts. Afterwards when one of the enerals addressed Kutuzov
askin whether he wished his caleche to be sent for, Kutuzov in
answerin unexpectedly ave a sob, bein evidently reatly moved.




CHAPTER VII

When the troops reached their niht's haltin place on the eihth of
November, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was already rowin
dusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lihtly
fallin snow and toward evenin it bean to clear. Throuh the fallin
snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost rew
keener.

An infantry reiment which had left Tarutino three thousand stron but
now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that niht
at its haltin place--a villae on the hihroad. The quartermasters who
met the reiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and dead
Frenchmen, cavalrymen, and members of the staff. There was only one hut
available for the reimental commander.

The commander rode up to his hut. The reiment passed throuh the
villae and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.

Like some hue many-limbed animal, the reiment bean to prepare its
lair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep throuh
the snow into a birch forest to the riht of the villae, and
immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashin of branches, and
merry voices could be heard from there. Another section amid the
reimental waons and horses which were standin in a roup was busy
ettin out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feedin the horses. A third
section scattered throuh the villae arranin quarters for the staff
officers, carryin out the French corpses that were in the huts, and
drain away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for the
campfires, or wattle fences to serve for shelter.

Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shakin down the hih wattle
wall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.

"Now then, all toether--shove!" cried the voices, and the hue surface
of the wall, sprinkled with snow and creakin with frost, was seen
swayin in the loom of the niht. The lower stakes cracked more and
more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushin
it. Loud, coarse lauhter and joyous shouts ensued.

"Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That's it... Where are
you shovin to?"

"Now, all toether! But wait a moment, boys... With a son!"

All stood silent, and a soft, pleasant velvety voice bean to sin. At
the end of the third verse as the last note died away, twenty voices
roared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it. All toether! Heave away,
boys!..." but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, and
in the silence that followed the heavy breathin of the men was audible.

"Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...
will you? You may want us one of these days."

Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into the
villae joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about thirty-
five feet lon and seven feet hih, moved forward alon the villae
street, swayin, pressin upon and cuttin the shoulders of the aspin
men.

"et alon... Fallin? What are you stoppin for? There now..."

Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.

"What are you up to?" suddenly came the authoritative voice of a
sereant major who came upon the men who were haulin their burden.
"There are entry here; the eneral himself is in that hut, and you
foul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll ive it to you!" shouted he,
hittin the first man who came in his way a swinin blow on the back.
"Can't you make less noise?"

The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck roaned and wiped
his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his fallin aainst
the wattle.

"There, how that devil hits out! He's made my face all bloody," said he
in a frihtened whisper when the sereant major had passed on.

"Don't you like it?" said a lauhin voice, and moderatin their tones
the men moved forward.

When they were out of the villae they bean talkin aain as loud as
before, interlardin their talk with the same aimless expletives.

In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had athered and
were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and the
maneuvers suested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank march
to the left, cut off the Vice-Kin (Murat) and capture him.

By the time the soldiers had draed the wattle fence to its place the
campfires were blazin on all sides ready for cookin, the wood
crackled, the snow was meltin, and black shadows of soldiers flitted to
and fro all over the occupied space where the snow had been trodden
down.

Axes and choppers were plied all around. Everythin was done without any
orders bein iven. Stores of wood were brouht for the niht, shelters
were ried up for the officers, caldrons were bein boiled, and muskets
and accouterments put in order.

The wattle wall the men had brouht was set up in a semicircle by the
Eihth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musket rests,
and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo, called the
roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the niht--some
repairin their footear, some smokin pipes, and some strippin
themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.




CHAPTER VIII

One would have thouht that under the almost incredibly wretched
conditions the Russian soldiers were in at that time--lackin warm boots
and sheepskin coats, without a roof over their heads, in the snow with
eihteen derees of frost, and without even full rations (the
commissariat did not always keep up with the troops)--they would have
presented a very sad and depressin spectacle.

On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditions
presented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This was because all who
bean to row depressed or who lost strenth were sifted out of the army
day by day. All the physically or morally weak had lon since been left
behind and only the flower of the army--physically and mentally--
remained.

More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eihth Company than
anywhere else. Two sereants major were sittin with them and their
campfire blazed brihter than others. For leave to sit by their wattle
they demanded contributions of fuel.

"Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are you lost or
have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted a red-haired
and red-faced man, screwin up his eyes and blinkin because of the
smoke but not movin back from the fire. "And you, Jackdaw, o and fetch
some wood!" said he to another soldier.

This red-haired man was neither a sereant nor a corporal, but bein
robust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier they
called "Jackdaw," a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, rose
obediently and was about to o but at that instant there came into the
liht of the fire the slender, handsome fiure of a youn soldier
carryin a load of wood.

"Brin it here--that's fine!"

They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it with
their mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their reatcoats, makin
the flames hiss and crackle. The men drew nearer and lit their pipes.
The handsome youn soldier who had brouht the wood, settin his arms
akimbo, bean stampin his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spot
where he stood.

"Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It's well that I'm a
musketeer..." he san, pretendin to hiccouh after each syllable.

"Look out, your soles will fly off!" shouted the red-haired man,
noticin that the sole of the dancer's boot was hanin loose. "What a
fellow you are for dancin!"

The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw it
on the fire.

"Riht enouh, friend," said he, and, havin sat down, took out of his
knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot.
"It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretchin out his feet
toward the fire.

"They'll soon be issuin us new ones. They say that when we've finished
hammerin them, we're to receive double kits!"

"And that son of a bitch Petrov has laed behind after all, it seems,"
said one sereant major.

"I've had an eye on him this lon while," said the other.

"Well, he's a poor sort of soldier..."

"But in the Third Company they say nine men were missin yesterday."

"Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how can he
walk?"

"Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sereant major.

"Do you want to be doin the same?" said an old soldier, turnin
reproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.

"Well, you know," said the sharp-nosed man they called Jackdaw in a
squeaky and unsteady voice, raisin himself at the other side of the
fire, "a plump man ets thin, but for a thin one it's death. Take me,
now! I've ot no strenth left," he added, with sudden resolution
turnin to the sereant major. "Tell them to send me to hospital; I'm
achin all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up."

"That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sereant major quietly.

The soldier said no more and the talk went on.

"What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact is that
not one of them had what you miht call real boots on," said a soldier,
startin a new theme. "They were no more than make-believes."

"The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearin the hut for the
colonel and carried them out. It was pitiful to see them, boys," put in
the dancer. "As they turned them over one seemed still alive and, would
you believe it, he jabbered somethin in their lino."

"But they're a clean folk, lads," the first man went on; "he was white--
as white as birchbark--and some of them are such fine fellows, you miht
think they were nobles."

"Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there."

"But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with a
puzzled smile. "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in his
own way. A queer lot!"

"But it's strane, friends," continued the man who had wondered at their
whiteness, "the peasants at Mozhaysk were sayin that when they bean
buryin the dead--where the battle was you know--well, those dead had
been lyin there for nearly a month, and says the peasant, 'they lie as
white as paper, clean, and not as much smell as a puff of powder
smoke.'"

"Was it from the cold?" asked someone.

"You're a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. If it
had been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. 'But,' he
says, 'o up to ours and they are all rotten and maoty. So,' he says,
'we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we dra
them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,' he says, 'are white as paper
and not so much smell as a whiff of unpowder.'"

All were silent.

"It must be from their food," said the sereant major. "They used to
obble the same food as the entry."

No one contradicted him.

"That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men were all
called up from ten villaes around and they carted for twenty days and
still didn't finish cartin the dead away. And as for the wolves, he
says..."

"That was a real battle," said an old soldier. "It's the only one worth
rememberin; but since that... it's only been tormentin folk."

"And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at them and, my
word, they didn't let us et near before they just threw down their
muskets and went on their knees. 'Pardon!' they say. That's only one
case. They say Platov took 'Poleon himself twice. But he didn't know the
riht charm. He catches him and catches him--no ood! He turns into a
bird in his hands and flies away. And there's no way of killin him
either."

"You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!"

"Liar, indeed! It's the real truth."

"If he fell into my hands, when I'd cauht him I'd bury him in the
round with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he's
ruined!"

"Well, anyhow we're oin to end it. He won't come here aain," remarked
the old soldier, yawnin.

The conversation flaed, and the soldiers bean settlin down to sleep.

"Look at the stars. It's wonderful how they shine! You would think the
women had spread out their linen," said one of the men, azin with
admiration at the Milky Way.

"That's a sin of a ood harvest next year."

"We shall want some more wood."

"You warm your back and your belly ets frozen. That's queer."

"O Lord!"

"What are you pushin for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he's
sprawlin!"

In the silence that ensued, the snorin of those who had fallen asleep
could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and aain
exchanin a few words. From a campfire a hundred paces off came a sound
of eneral, merry lauhter.

"Hark at them roarin there in the Fifth Company!" said one of the
soldiers, "and what a lot of them there are!"

One of the men ot up and went over to the Fifth Company.

"They're havin such fun," said he, comin back. "Two Frenchies have
turned up. One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaerer. He's
sinin sons...."

"Oh, I'll o across and have a look...."

And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.




CHAPTER IX

The fifth company was bivouackin at the very ede of the forest. A hue
campfire was blazin brihtly in the midst of the snow, lihtin up the
branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.

About midniht they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,
and the cracklin of dry branches.

"A bear, lads," said one of the men.

They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into the
briht fireliht stepped two stranely clad human fiures clinin to
one another.

These were two Frenchmen who had been hidin in the forest. They came up
to the fire, hoarsely utterin somethin in a lanuae our soldiers did
not understand. One was taller than the other; he wore an officer's hat
and seemed quite exhausted. On approachin the fire he had been oin to
sit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl tied
round his head, was stroner. He raised his companion and said
somethin, pointin to his mouth. The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,
spread a reatcoat on the round for the sick man, and brouht some
buckwheat porride and vodka for both of them.

The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his head
wrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.

When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porride he
suddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to the
soldiers, who could not understand him. Ramballe refused food and
restin his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire, lookin at
the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionally he emitted a
lon-drawn roan and then aain became silent. Morel, pointin to his
shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe was
an officer and ouht to be warmed. A Russian officer who had come up to
the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a French
officer into his hut to warm him, and when the messener returned and
said that the colonel wished the officer to be brouht to him, Ramballe
was told to o. He rose and tried to walk, but staered and would have
fallen had not a soldier standin by held him up.

"You won't do it aain, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winkin and
turnin mockinly to Ramballe.

"Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are--a real peasant!"
came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jestin soldier.

They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of two
soldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms around their
necks while they carried him and bean wailin plaintively:

"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, my
brave, kind friends," and he leaned his head aainst the shoulder of one
of the men like a child.

Meanwhile Morel was sittin in the best place by the fire, surrounded by
the soldiers.

Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streamin eyes, was
wearin a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round his
head over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was sinin a French son
in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.
The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him.

"Now then, now then, teach us how it oes! I'll soon pick it up. How is
it?" said the man--a siner and a wa--whom Morel was embracin.

"Vive Henri Quatre! Vive ce roi valiant!" san Morel, winkin. "Ce
diable a quatre..." *


* "Lon live Henry the Fourth, that valiant kin! That rowdy devil."

"Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier, flourishin
his arm and really catchin the tune.

"Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rouh, joyous lauhter from all sides.

Morel, wrinklin up his face, lauhed too.

"Well, o on, o on!"


"Qui eut le triple talent, De boire, de battre, Et d'etre un vert
alant." *


* Who had a triple talent For drinkin, for fihtin, And for bein a
allant old boy...

"It oes smoothly, too. Well, now, Zaletaev!"

"Ke..." Zaletaev, brouht out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,
laboriously pursin his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e de-tra-va-
a-la" he san.

"Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more to eat?"

"ive him some porride: it takes a lon time to et filled up after
starvin."

They ave him some more porride and Morel with a lauh set to work on
his third bowl. All the youn soldiers smiled aily as they watched him.
The older men, who thouht it undinified to amuse themselves with such
nonsense, continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire, but one
would occasionally raise himself on an elbow and lance at Morel with a
smile.

"They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in his
coat. "Even wormwood rows on its own root."

"O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hard
frost...."

They all rew silent. The stars, as if knowin that no one was lookin
at them, bean to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flarin up,
now vanishin, now tremblin, they were busy whisperin somethin
ladsome and mysterious to one another.




CHAPTER X

The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematical
proression; and that crossin of the Berezina about which so much has
been written was only one intermediate stae in its destruction, and not
at all the decisive episode of the campain. If so much has been and
still is written about the Berezina, on the French side this is only
because at the broken bride across that river the calamities their army
had been previously endurin were suddenly concentrated at one moment
into a traic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on the
Russian side merely because in Petersbur--far from the seat of war--a
plan (aain one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catch Napoleon in a
strateic trap at the Berezina River. Everyone assured himself that all
would happen accordin to plan, and therefore insisted that it was just
the crossin of the Berezina that destroyed the French army. In reality
the results of the crossin were much less disastrous to the French--in
uns and men lost--than Krasnoe had been, as the fiures show.

The sole importance of the crossin of the Berezina lies in the fact
that it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plans for
cuttin off the enemy's retreat and the soundness of the only possible
line of action--the one Kutuzov and the eneral mass of the army
demanded--namely, simply to follow the enemy up. The French crowd fled
at a continually increasin speed and all its enery was directed to
reachin its oal. It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossible
to block its path. This was shown not so much by the arranements it
made for crossin as by what took place at the brides. When the brides
broke down, unarmed soldiers, people from Moscow and women with children
who were with the French transport, all--carried on by vis inertiae--
pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and did not,
surrender.

That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fuitives and of pursuers
was equally bad. As lon as they remained with their own people each
miht hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he held
amon them. But those who surrendered, while remainin in the same
pitiful pliht, would be on a lower level to claim a share in the
necessities of life. The French did not need to be informed of the fact
that half the prisoners--with whom the Russians did not know what to do-
-perished of cold and huner despite their captors' desire to save them;
they felt that it could not be otherwise. The most compassionate Russian
commanders, those favorable to the French--and even the Frenchmen in the
Russian service--could do nothin for the prisoners. The French perished
from the conditions to which the Russian army was itself exposed. It was
impossible to take bread and clothes from our hunry and indispensable
soldiers to ive to the French who, thouh not harmful, or hated, or
uilty, were simply unnecessary. Some Russians even did that, but they
were exceptions.

Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.
Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save in collective
fliht, and on that the whole strenth of the French was concentrated.

The farther they fled the more wretched became the pliht of the
remnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence of the
Petersbur plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and the
keener rew the passions of the Russian commanders, who blamed one
another and Kutuzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of the
Petersbur Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led to
dissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more stronly
expressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a
respectful form, makin it impossible for him to ask wherein he was to
blame. They did not talk seriously to him; when reportin to him or
askin for his sanction they appeared to be fulfillin a rerettable
formality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him at
every turn.

Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that it
was useless to talk to the old man; that he would never rasp the
profundity of their plans, that he would answer with his phrases (which
they thouht were mere phrases) about a "olden bride," about the
impossibility of crossin the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions,
and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said--that it
was necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots--was so
simple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that it
was evident that he was old and stupid and that they, thouh not in
power, were commanders of enius.

After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersbur
hero Wittenstein, this mood and the ossip of the staff reached their
maximum. Kutuzov saw this and merely sihed and shrued his shoulders.
Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he et anry and write
to Bennisen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the followin
letter:

"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please be
so ood as to set off for Kalua on receipt of this, and there await
further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty."

But after Bennisen's departure, the rand Duke Tsarevich Constantine
Pavlovich joined the army. He had taken part in the beinnin of the
campain but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov. Now
havin come to the army, he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor's
displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their
advance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days'
time.

The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs--this
same Kutuzov who in Auust had been chosen commander-in-chief aainst
the soverein's wishes and who had removed the rand Duke and heir--
apparent from the army--who on his own authority and contrary to the
Emperor's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now realized at
once that his day was over, that his part was played, and that the power
he was supposed to hold was no loner his. And he understood this not
merely from the attitude of the court. He saw on the one hand that the
military business in which he had played his part was ended and felt
that his mission was accomplished; and at the same time he bean to be
conscious of the physical weariness of his aed body and of the
necessity of physical rest.

On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna--his "dear Vilna"
as he called it. Twice durin his career Kutuzov had been overnor of
Vilna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found old
friends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he had
so lon been deprived. And he suddenly turned from the cares of army and
state and, as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed,
immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been
accustomed, as if all that was takin place and all that had still to be
done in the realm of history did not concern him at all.

Chichaov, one of the most zealous "cutters-off" and "breakers-up," who
had first wanted to effect a diversion in reece and then in Warsaw but
never wished to o where he was sent: Chichaov, noted for the boldness
with which he spoke to the Emperor, and who considered Kutuzov to be
under an obliation to him because when he was sent to make peace with
Turkey in 1811 independently of Kutuzov, and found that peace had
already been concluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of
securin that peace was really Kutuzov's; this Chichaov was the first
to meet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undress
naval uniform, with a dirk, and holdin his cap under his arm, he handed
Kutuzov a arrison report and the keys of the town. The contemptuously
respectful attitude of the youner men to the old man in his dotae was
expressed in the hihest deree by the behavior of Chichaov, who knew
of the accusations that were bein directed aainst Kutuzov.

When speakin to Chichaov, Kutuzov incidentally mentioned that the
vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borisov
had been recovered and would be restored to him.

"You mean to imply that I have nothin to eat out of.... On the
contrary, I can supply you with everythin even if you want to ive
dinner parties," warmly replied Chichaov, who tried by every word he
spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imained Kutuzov to be
animated by the same desire.

Kutuzov, shruin his shoulders, replied with his subtle penetratin
smile: "I meant merely to say what I said."

Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the reater part of the
army at Vilna. Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack
and physically feeble durin his stay in that town. He attended to army
affairs reluctantly, left everythin to his enerals, and while awaitin
the Emperor's arrival led a dissipated life.

Havin left Petersbur on the seventh of December with his suite--Count
Tolstoy, Prince Volkonski, Arakcheev, and others--the Emperor reached
Vilna on the eleventh, and in his travelin sleih drove straiht to the
castle. In spite of the severe frost some hundred enerals and staff
officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well as
a uard of honor of the Semenov reiment.

A courier who alloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with three
foam-flecked horses, shouted "Comin!" and Konovnitsyn rushed into the
vestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waitin in the hall porter's little
lode.

A minute later the old man's lare stout fiure in full-dress uniform,
his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,
waddled out into the porch. He put on his hat with its peaks to the
sides and, holdin his loves in his hand and walkin with an effort
sideways down the steps to the level of the street, took in his hand the
report he had prepared for the Emperor.

There was runnin to and fro and whisperin; another troyka flew
furiously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approachin sleih in
which the fiures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already be
descried.

From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically aitatin effect
on the old eneral. He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,
readjusted his hat, and pullin himself toether drew himself up and, at
the very moment when the Emperor, havin alihted from the sleih,
lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and bean speakin in his
smooth, inratiatin voice.

The Emperor with a rapid lance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot,
frowned for an instant, but immediately masterin himself went up to the
old man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too, owin
to a lon-standin impression related to his innermost feelins, had its
usual effect on Kutuzov and he ave a sob.

The Emperor reeted the officers and the Semenov uard, and aain
pressin the old man's hand went with him into the castle.

When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his
dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made
at Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentions for a
future campain abroad. Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark. The same
submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to the
Emperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled
on his face now.

When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossin
the ballroom with his heavy waddlin ait, he was arrested by someone's
voice sayin:

"Your Serene Hihness!"

Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a lon while into the eyes of
Count Tolstoy, who stood before him holdin a silver salver on which lay
a small object. Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected of
him.

Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed
across his puffy face, and bowin low and respectfully he took the
object that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. eore of the
First Class.




CHAPTER XI

Next day the field marshal ave a dinner and ball which the Emperor
honored by his presence. Kutuzov had received the Order of St. eore of
the First Class and the Emperor showed him the hihest honors, but
everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him. The proprieties
were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example, but
everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and ood-for-
nothin. When Kutuzov, conformin to a custom of Catherine's day,
ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the
Emperor's feet on his enterin the ballroom, the Emperor made a wry face
and muttered somethin in which some people cauht the words, "the old
comedian."

The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna
by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the
importance of the comin campain.

When on the followin mornin the Emperor said to the officers assembled
about him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!" they
all understood that the war was not ended.

Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that
no fresh war could improve the position or add to the lory of Russia,
but could only spoil and lower the lorious position that Russia had
ained. He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levyin
fresh troops, spoke of the hardships already endured by the people, of
the possibility of failure and so forth.

This bein the field marshal's frame of mind he was naturally rearded
as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impendin war.

To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method was
to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at the
beinnin of the Russian campain--to transfer the authority to the
Emperor himself, thus cuttin the round from under the commander in
chief's feet without upsettin the old man by informin him of the
chane.

With this object his staff was radually reconstructed and its real
strenth removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll, Konovnitsyn, and
Ermolov received fresh appointments. Everyone spoke loudly of the field
marshal's reat weakness and failin health.

His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and iven to
another. And in fact his health was poor.

So naturally, simply, and radually--just as he had come from Turkey to
the Treasury in Petersbur to recruit the militia, and then to the army
when he was needed there--now when his part was played out, Kutuzov's
place was taken by a new and necessary performer.

The war of 1812, besides its national sinificance dear to every Russian
heart, was now to assume another, a European, sinificance.

The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a
movement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh war another
leader was necessary, havin qualities and views differin from
Kutuzov's and animated by different motives.

Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east
to west and for the refixin of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been
for the salvation and lory of Russia.

Kutuzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, or
Napoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative of
the Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had
been liberated and raised to the summit of her lory, there was nothin
left to do as a Russian. Nothin remained for the representative of the
national war but to die, and Kutuzov died.




CHAPTER XII

As enerally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of the
physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after
they were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on the third
day there, when preparin to o to Kiev, he fell ill and was laid up for
three months. He had what the doctors termed "bilious fever." But
despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and ave him
medicines to drink, he recovered.

Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that happened
to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He remembered only
the dull ray weather now rainy and now snowy, internal physical
distress, and pains in his feet and side. He remembered a eneral
impression of the misfortunes and sufferins of people and of bein
worried by the curiosity of officers and enerals who questioned him, he
also remembered his difficulty in procurin a conveyance and horses, and
above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That same
day he had learned that Prince Andrew, after survivin the battle of
Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house
at Yaroslavl, and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's
death, supposin that Pierre had heard of it lon before. All this at
the time seemed merely strane to Pierre: he felt he could not rasp its
sinificance. Just then he was only anxious to et away as quickly as
possible from places where people were killin one another, to some
peaceful refue where he could recover himself, rest, and think over all
the strane new facts he had learned; but on reachin Orel he
immediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he saw
in attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who had
come from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had been
livin on his estate at Elets and hearin of his rescue and illness had
come to look after him.

It was only radually durin his convalescence that Pierre lost the
impressions he had become accustomed to durin the last few months and
ot used to the idea that no one would oblie him to o anywhere
tomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that he
would be sure to et his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a lon time in
his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity. In the
same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been
told after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death of
his wife, and the destruction of the French.

A joyous feelin of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom natural
to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside Moscow--
filled Pierre's soul durin his convalescence. He was surprised to find
that this inner freedom, which was independent of external conditions,
now had as it were an additional settin of external liberty. He was
alone in a strane town, without acquaintances. No one demanded anythin
of him or sent him anywhere. He had all he wanted: the thouht of his
wife which had been a continual torment to him was no loner there,
since she was no more.

"Oh, how ood! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laid
table was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down for
the niht on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the French had
one and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how ood, how splendid!"

And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and what then?
What am I oin to do?" And he immediately ave himself the answer:
"Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"

The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thin he had
continually souht to find--the aim of life--no loner existed for him
now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappeared
temporarily--he felt that it no loner existed for him and could not
present itself aain. And this very absence of an aim ave him the
complete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness at
this time.

He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind of
rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-livin, ever-manifest
od. Formerly he had souht Him in aims he set himself. That search for
an aim had been simply a search for od, and suddenly in his captivity
he had learned not by words or reasonin but by direct feelin what his
nurse had told him lon ao: that od is here and everywhere. In his
captivity he had learned that in Karataev od was reater, more infinite
and unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe reconized by the
Freemasons. He felt like a man who after strainin his eyes to see into
the far distance finds what he souht at his very feet. All his life he
had looked over the heads of the men around him, when he should have
merely looked in front of him without strainin his eyes.

In the past he had never been able to find that reat inscrutable
infinite somethin. He had only felt that it must exist somewhere and
had looked for it. In everythin near and comprehensible he had only
what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had equipped
himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space, where
petty worldliness hidin itself in misty distance had seemed to him
reat and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen. And such had
European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropy
seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accounted
them, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seen
the same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness. Now, however, he had
learned to see the reat, eternal, and infinite in everythin, and
therefore--to see it and enjoy its contemplation--he naturally threw
away the telescope throuh which he had till now azed over men's heads,
and ladly rearded the ever-chanin, eternally reat, unfathomable,
and infinite life around him. And the closer he looked the more tranquil
and happy he became. That dreadful question, "What for?" which had
formerly destroyed all his mental edifices, no loner existed for him.
To that question, "What for?" a simple answer was now always ready in
his soul: "Because there is a od, that od without whose will not one
hair falls from a man's head."




CHAPTER XIII

In external ways Pierre had hardly chaned at all. In appearance he was
just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and seemed
occupied not with what was before his eyes but with somethin special of
his own. The difference between his former and present self was that
formerly when he did not rasp what lay before him or was said to him,
he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seekin to
distinuish somethin at a distance. At present he still forot what was
said to him and still did not see what was before his eyes, but he now
looked with a scarcely perceptible and seeminly ironic smile at what
was before him and listened to what was said, thouh evidently seein
and hearin somethin quite different. Formerly he had appeared to be a
kindhearted but unhappy man, and so people had been inclined to avoid
him. Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips, and
sympathy for others, shone in his eyes with a questionin look as to
whether they were as contented as he was, and people felt pleased by his
presence.

Previously he had talked a reat deal, rew excited when he talked, and
seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and knew
how to listen so that people readily told him their most intimate
secrets.

The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularly
hostile to him since she had felt herself under obliations to him after
the old count's death, now after stayin a short time in Orel--where she
had come intendin to show Pierre that in spite of his inratitude she
considered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her surprise and vexation
that she had become fond of him. Pierre did not in any way seek her
approval, he merely studied her with interest. Formerly she had felt
that he rearded her with indifference and irony, and so had shrunk into
herself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative side
of her nature; but now he seemed to be tryin to understand the most
intimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwards
ratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.

The most cunnin man could not have crept into her confidence more
successfully, evokin memories of the best times of her youth and
showin sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunnin consisted simply in
findin pleasure in drawin out the human qualities of the embittered,
hard, and (in her own way) proud princess.

"Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence of
bad people but of people such as myself," thouht she.

His servants too--Terenty and Vaska--in their own way noticed the chane
that had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he had become much
"simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress and wished him ood
niht, often linered with his master's boots in his hands and clothes
over his arm, to see whether he would not start a talk. And Pierre,
noticin that Terenty wanted a chat, enerally kept him there.

"Well, tell me... now, how did you et food?" he would ask.

And Terenty would bein talkin of the destruction of Moscow, and of the
old count, and would stand for a lon time holdin the clothes and
talkin, or sometimes listenin to Pierre's stories, and then would o
out into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master and
affection for him.

The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, thouh he
considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every moment
was of value to sufferin humanity, would sit for hours with Pierre
tellin him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on the
characters of his patients in eneral, and especially of the ladies.

"It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like our
provincials," he would say.

There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and the
doctor brouht one of them, a youn Italian, to see Pierre.

This officer bean visitin Pierre, and the princess used to make fun of
the tenderness the Italian expressed for him.

The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talk
with him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love, and
pour out to him his indination aainst the French and especially
aainst Napoleon.

"If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilee to fiht
such a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from the
French, do not even feel animosity toward them."

Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely by
evokin the best side of his nature and takin a pleasure in so doin.

Durin the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old masonic
acquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lode in
1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress who
had a lare estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary post in
the commissariat department in that town.

Hearin that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, thouh they had never been
intimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacy
that people who meet in a desert enerally express for one another.
Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his own
circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.

But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had laed much
behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, into
apathy and eotism.

"You are lettin yourself o, my dear fellow," he said.

But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had been
formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre as
he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strane to think that
he had been like that himself but a short time before.

Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,
his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He rearded all these
occupations as hindrances to life, and considered that they were all
contemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and his
family. Military, administrative, political, and masonic interests
continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre, without tryin to chane
the other's views and without condemnin him, but with the quiet,
joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in this
strane thouh very familiar phenomenon.

There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with the
princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met, which
ained for him the eneral ood will. This was his acknowledment of the
impossibility of chanin a man's convictions by words, and his
reconition of the possibility of everyone thinkin, feelin, and seein
thins each from his own point of view. This leitimate peculiarity of
each individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became a
basis of the sympathy he felt for, and the interest he took in, other
people. The difference, and sometimes complete contradiction, between
men's opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleased
him and drew from him an amused and entle smile.

In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center of
ravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,
especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man, he
was very exposed, produced in him a state of hopeless aitation and
perplexity. "To ive or not to ive?" he had asked himself. "I have it
and he needs it. But someone else needs it still more. Who needs it
most? And perhaps they are both impostors?" In the old days he had been
unable to find a way out of all these surmises and had iven to all who
asked as lon as he had anythin to ive. Formerly he had been in a
similar state of perplexity with reard to every question concernin his
property, when one person advised one thin and another somethin else.

Now to his surprise he found that he no loner felt either doubt or
perplexity about these questions. There was now within him a jude who
by some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done.

He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he felt
certain of what ouht and what ouht not to be done. The first time he
had recourse to his new jude was when a French prisoner, a colonel,
came to him and, after talkin a reat deal about his exploits,
concluded by makin what amounted to a demand that Pierre should ive
him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children. Pierre
refused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwards
surprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear so
insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel's
demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice when
leavin Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money of
which he was evidently in need. A further proof to Pierre of his own
more settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decision
with reard to his wife's debts and to the rebuildin of his houses in
and near Moscow.

His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him his
diminished income. The burnin of Moscow had cost him, accordin to the
head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.

To console Pierre for these losses the head steward ave him an estimate
showin that despite these losses his income would not be diminished but
would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's debts which he
was under no obliation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow house
and the country house on his Moscow estate, which had cost him eihty
thousand rubles a year and brouht in nothin.

"Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile. "I
don't need all that at all. By bein ruined I have become much richer."

But in January Savelich came from Moscow and ave him an account of the
state of thins there, and spoke of the estimate an architect had made
of the cost of rebuildin the town and country houses, speakin of this
as of a settled matter. About the same time he received letters from
Prince Vasili and other Petersbur acquaintances speakin of his wife's
debts. And Pierre decided that the steward's proposals which had so
pleased him were wron and that he must o to Petersbur and settle his
wife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow. Why this was necessary he did
not know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary. His income
would be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.

Willarski was oin to Moscow and they areed to travel toether.

Durin the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre had
experienced a feelin of joy, freedom, and life; but when durin his
journey he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of new
faces, that feelin was intensified. Throuhout his journey he felt like
a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone--the staecoach driver, the post-house
overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villaes--had a new
sinificance for him. The presence and remarks of Willarski who
continually deplored the inorance and poverty of Russia and its
backwardness compared with Europe only heihtened Pierre's pleasure.
Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strenth and
vitality--the strenth which in that vast space amid the snows
maintained the life of this oriinal, peculiar, and unique people. He
did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to aree with him--an
apparent areement bein the simplest way to avoid discussions that
could lead to nothin--and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.




CHAPTER XIV

It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap has
been destroyed are hurryin: some from the heap drain bits of
rubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why they
jostle, overtake one another, and fiht, and it would be equally
difficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of the
French to thron to the place that had formerly been Moscow. But when we
watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, enery, and
immense number of the delvin insects prove that despite the destruction
of the heap, somethin indestructible, which thouh intanible is the
real strenth of the colony, still exists; and similarly, thouh in
Moscow in the month of October there was no overnment and no churches,
shrines, riches, or houses--it was still the Moscow it had been in
Auust. All was destroyed, except somethin intanible yet powerful and
indestructible.

The motives of those who throned from all sides to Moscow after it had
been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at first
for the most part savae and brutal. One motive only they all had in
common: a desire to et to the place that had been called Moscow, to
apply their activities there.

Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in a
fortniht twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 the
number, ever increasin and increasin, exceeded what it had been in
1812.

The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzinerode's
detachment, peasants from the adjacent villaes, and residents who had
fled from Moscow and had been hidin in its vicinity. The Russians who
entered Moscow, findin it plundered, plundered it in their turn. They
continued what the French had beun. Trains of peasant carts came to
Moscow to carry off to the villaes what had been abandoned in the
ruined houses and the streets. The Cossacks carried off what they could
to their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in other
houses and moved it to their own, pretendin that it was their property.

But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a third
continent, and with increasin numbers plunderin became more and more
difficult and assumed more definite forms.

The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the oranizations of
reular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, with
luxury, and overnmental and reliious institutions. These forms were
lifeless but still existed. There were bazaars, shops, warehouses,
market stalls, ranaries--for the most part still stocked with oods--
and there were factories and workshops, palaces and wealthy houses
filled with luxuries, hospitals, prisons, overnment offices, churches,
and cathedrals. The loner the French remained the more these forms of
town life perished, until finally all was mered into one confused,
lifeless scene of plunder.

The more the plunderin by the French continued, the more both the
wealth of Moscow and the strenth of its plunderers was destroyed. But
plunderin by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the city
bean, had an opposite effect: the loner it continued and the reater
the number of people takin part in it the more rapidly was the wealth
of the city and its reular life restored.

Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,
some by official duties, some by self-interest--house owners, clery,
officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants--streamed into
Moscow as blood flows to the heart.

Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry off
plunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses out
of the town. Other peasants, havin heard of their comrades'
discomfiture, came to town brinin rye, oats, and hay, and beat down
one another's prices to below what they had been in former days. ans
of carpenters hopin for hih pay arrived in Moscow every day, and on
all sides los were bein hewn, new houses built, and old, charred ones
repaired. Tradesmen bean tradin in booths. Cookshops and taverns were
opened in partially burned houses. The clery resumed the services in
many churches that had not been burned. Donors contributed Church
property that had been stolen. overnment clerks set up their baize-
covered tables and their pieonholes of documents in small rooms. The
hiher authorities and the police oranized the distribution of oods
left behind by the French. The owners of houses in which much property
had been left, brouht there from other houses, complained of the
injustice of takin everythin to the Faceted Palace in the Kremlin;
others insisted that as the French had athered thins from different
houses into this or that house, it would be unfair to allow its owner to
keep all that was found there. They abused the police and bribed them,
made out estimates at ten times their value for overnment stores that
had perished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchin
wrote proclamations.




CHAPTER XV

At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex of
his house which had not been burned. He called on Count Rostopchin and
on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leave
for Petersbur two days later. Everybody was celebratin the victory,
everythin was bubblin with life in the ruined but revivin city.
Everyone was pleased to see Pierre, everyone wished to meet him, and
everyone questioned him about what he had seen. Pierre felt particularly
well disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his uard
for fear of bindin himself in any way. To all questions put to him--
whether important or quite triflin--such as: Where would he live? Was
he oin to rebuild? When was he oin to Petersbur and would he mind
takin a parcel for someone?--he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I think
so," and so on.

He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thouht of
Natasha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasant
memory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free from social
obliations but also from that feelin which, it seemed to him, he had
aroused in himself.

On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys that
Princess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferins, and last days of
Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre's thouhts and now recurred to
him with fresh vividness. Havin heard at dinner that Princess Mary was
in Moscow and livin in her house--which had not been burned--in
Vozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evenin to see her.

On his way to the house Pierre kept thinkin of Prince Andrew, of their
friendship, of his various meetins with him, and especially of the last
one at Borodino.

"Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?
Is it possible that the meanin of life was not disclosed to him before
he died?" thouht Pierre. He recalled Karataev and his death and
involuntarily bean to compare these two men, so different, and yet so
similar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love he
felt for both of them.

Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.
The house had escaped the fire; it showed sins of damae but its
eneral aspect was unchaned. The old footman, who met Pierre with a
stern face as if wishin to make the visitor feel that the absence of
the old prince had not disturbed the order of thins in the house,
informed him that the princess had one to her own apartments, and that
she received on Sundays.

"Announce me. Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre.

"Yes, sir," said the man. "Please step into the portrait allery."

A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who brouht
word from the princess that she would be very lad to see Pierre if he
would excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.

In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with her
another person dressed in black. Pierre remembered that the princess
always had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like he
never knew or remembered. "This must be one of her companions," he
thouht, lancin at the lady in the black dress.

The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.

"Yes," she said, lookin at his altered face after he had kissed her
hand, "so this is how we meet aain. He spoke of you even at the very
last," she went on, turnin her eyes from Pierre to her companion with a
shyness that surprised him for an instant.

"I was so lad to hear of your safety. It was the first piece of ood
news we had received for a lon time."

Aain the princess lanced round at her companion with even more
uneasiness in her manner and was about to add somethin, but Pierre
interrupted her.

"Just imaine--I knew nothin about him!" said he. "I thouht he had
been killed. All I know I heard at second hand from others. I only know
that he fell in with the Rostovs.... What a strane coincidence!"

Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He lanced once at the
companion's face, saw her attentive and kindly aze fixed on him, and,
as often happens when one is talkin, felt somehow that this companion
in the black dress was a ood, kind, excellent creature who would not
hinder his conversin freely with Princess Mary.

But when he mentioned the Rostovs, Princess Mary's face expressed still
reater embarrassment. She aain lanced rapidly from Pierre's face to
that of the lady in the black dress and said:

"Do you really not reconize her?"

Pierre looked aain at the companion's pale, delicate face with its
black eyes and peculiar mouth, and somethin near to him, lon forotten
and more than sweet, looked at him from those attentive eyes.

"But no, it can't be!" he thouht. "This stern, thin, pale face that
looks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her." But
at that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,
effort, and stress, like the openin of a door rown rusty on its
hines, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and from
that openin door came a breath of frarance which suffused Pierre with
a happiness he had lon forotten and of which he had not even been
thinkin--especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him, and
enveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no loner possible,
it was Natasha and he loved her.

At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,
and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.
He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. He tried to hide his
aitation. But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly--clearer
than any words could have done--did he betray to himself, to her, and to
Princess Mary that he loved her.

"No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thouht Pierre. But as soon as
he tried to continue the conversation he had beun with Princess Mary he
aain lanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face and
a still-stroner aitation of minled joy and fear seized his soul. He
became confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he was
sayin.

Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect to
see her there, but he had failed to reconize her because the chane in
her since he last saw her was immense. She had rown thin and pale, but
that was not what made her unreconizable; she was unreconizable at the
moment he entered because on that face whose eyes had always shone with
a suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered and
lanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile: only her eyes
were kindly attentive and sadly interroative.

Pierre's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha's part,
but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face.




CHAPTER XVI

"She has come to stay with me," said Princess Mary. "The count and
countess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadful
state; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor. They
insisted on her comin with me."

"Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre, addressin
Natasha. "You know it happened the very day we were rescued. I saw him.
What a delihtful boy he was!"

Natasha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyes
widened and lit up.

"What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre. "Nothin!
Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?"

"Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith..." remarked
Princess Mary.

"Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her.

"Why is it true?" Natasha asked, lookin attentively into Pierre's eyes.

"How can you ask why?" said Princess Mary. "The thouht alone of what
awaits..."

Natasha without waitin for Princess Mary to finish aain looked
inquirinly at Pierre.

"And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that there is a
od rulin us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours."

Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.
Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and aain addressed Princess Mary,
askin about his friend's last days.

Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same time he felt
that his freedom had also completely one. He felt that there was now a
jude of his every word and action whose judment mattered more to him
than that of all the rest of the world. As he spoke now he was
considerin what impression his words would make on Natasha. He did not
purposely say thins to please her, but whatever he was sayin he
rearded from her standpoint.

Princess Mary--reluctantly as is usual in such cases--bean tellin of
the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre's face
quiverin with emotion, his questions and his eaer restless expression,
radually compelled her to o into details which she feared to recall
for her own sake.

"Yes, yes, and so...?" Pierre kept sayin as he leaned toward her with
his whole body and eaerly listened to her story. "Yes, yes... so he
rew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had always souht one
thin--to be perfectly ood--so he could not be afraid of death. The
faults he had--if he had any--were not of his makin. So he did
soften?... What a happy thin that he saw you aain," he added, suddenly
turnin to Natasha and lookin at her with eyes full of tears.

Natasha's face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.
She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.

"Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with its
deep chest notes. "For me it certainly was happiness." She paused. "And
he... he... he said he was wishin for it at the very moment I entered
the room...."

Natasha's voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on her
knees, and then controllin herself with an evident effort lifted her
head and bean to speak rapidly.

"We knew nothin of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dare to
ask about him. Then suddenly Sonya told me he was travelin with us. I
had no idea and could not imaine what state he was in, all I wanted was
to see him and be with him," she said, tremblin, and breathin quickly.

And not lettin them interrupt her she went on to tell what she had
never yet mentioned to anyone--all she had lived throuh durin those
three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl.

Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full of
tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,
nor of what she was tellin. He listened to her and felt only pity for
her, for what she was sufferin now while she was speakin.

Princess Mary, frownin in her effort to hold back her tears, sat beside
Natasha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days of
her brother's and Natasha's love.

Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.

She spoke, minlin most triflin details with the intimate secrets of
her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times she
repeated the same thin twice.

Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door askin whether little
Nicholas miht come in to say ood niht.

"Well, that's all--everythin," said Natasha.

She ot up quickly just as Nicholas entered, almost ran to the door
which was hidden by curtains, struck her head aainst it, and rushed
from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.

Pierre azed at the door throuh which she had disappeared and did not
understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.

Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawin his attention
to her nephew who had entered the room.

At that moment of emotional tenderness youn Nicholas' face, which
resembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissed
the boy he ot up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to the
window. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, but she would not let
him o.

"No, Natasha and I sometimes don't o to sleep till after two, so please
don't o. I will order supper. o downstairs, we will come immediately."

Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: "This is the first
time she has talked of him like that."




CHAPTER XVII

Pierre was shown into the lare, brihtly lit dinin room; a few minutes
later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natasha. Natasha
was calm, thouh a severe and rave expression had aain settled on her
face. They all three of them now experienced that feelin of awkwardness
which usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk. It is
impossible to o back to the same conversation, to talk of trifles is
awkward, and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems like
affectation. They went silently to table. The footmen drew back the
chairs and pushed them up aain. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin
and, resolvin to break the silence, looked at Natasha and at Princess
Mary. They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of
both shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life
also has joy.

"Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those words
suddenly banished the shadows of the past. "Now tell us about yourself,"
said she. "One hears such improbable wonders about you."

"Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him.
"They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abramovna
invited me to her house and kept tellin me what had happened, or ouht
to have happened, to me. Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I ouht
to tell of my experiences. In eneral I have noticed that it is very
easy to be an interestin man (I am an interestin man now); people
invite me out and tell me all about myself."

Natasha smiled and was on the point of speakin.

"We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lost two
millions in Moscow. Is that true?"

"But I am three times as rich as before," returned Pierre.

Thouh the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife's
debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he had
become three times as rich as before.

"What I have certainly ained is freedom," he bean seriously, but did
not continue, noticin that this theme was too eotistic.

"And are you buildin?"

"Yes. Savelich says I must!"

"Tell me, you did not know of the countess' death when you decided to
remain in Moscow?" asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed, noticin
that her question, followin his mention of freedom, ascribed to his
words a meanin he had perhaps not intended.

"No," answered Pierre, evidently not considerin awkward the meanin
Princess Mary had iven to his words. "I heard of it in Orel and you
cannot imaine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple," he
added quickly, lancin at Natasha and noticin on her face curiosity as
to how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shocked me terribly.
When two people quarrel they are always both in fault, and one's own
uilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no loner
alive. And then such a death... without friends and without consolation!
I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, and was pleased to notice
a look of lad approval on Natasha's face.

"Yes, and so you are once more an eliible bachelor," said Princess
Mary.

Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a lon time tried not to look at
Natasha. When he ventured to lance her way aain her face was cold,
stern, and he fancied even contemptuous.

"And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?"
said Princess Mary.

Pierre lauhed.

"No, not once! Everybody seems to imaine that bein taken prisoner
means bein Napoleon's uest. Not only did I never see him but I heard
nothin about him--I was in much lower company!"

Supper was over, and Pierre who at first declined to speak about his
captivity was radually led on to do so.

"But it's true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?" Natasha
asked with a sliht smile. "I uessed it then when we met at the
Sukharev tower, do you remember?"

Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was radually led by
Princess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into ivin a
detailed account of his adventures.

At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with him
toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came to
describe the horrors and sufferins he had witnessed he was
unconsciously carried away and bean speakin with the suppressed
emotion of a man re-experiencin in recollection stron impressions he
has lived throuh.

Princess Mary with a entle smile looked now at Pierre and now at
Natasha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his oodness.
Natasha, leanin on her elbow, the expression of her face constantly
chanin with the narrative, watched Pierre with an attention that never
wandered--evidently herself experiencin all that he described. Not only
her look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showed
Pierre that she understood just what he wished to convey. It was clear
that she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,
but could not, express in words. The account Pierre ave of the incident
with the child and the woman for protectin whom he was arrested was
this: "It was an awful siht--children abandoned, some in the flames...
One was snatched out before my eyes... and there were women who had
their thins snatched off and their earrins torn out..." he flushed and
rew confused. "Then a patrol arrived and all the men--all those who
were not lootin, that is--were arrested, and I amon them."

"I am sure you're not tellin us everythin; I am sure you did
somethin..." said Natasha and pausin added, "somethin fine?"

Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass over
the horrible details, but Natasha insisted that he should not omit
anythin.

Pierre bean to tell about Karataev, but paused. By this time he had
risen from the table and was pacin the room, Natasha followin him with
her eyes. Then he added:

"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man--that
simple fellow."

"Yes, yes, o on!" said Natasha. "Where is he?"

"They killed him almost before my eyes."

And Pierre, his voice tremblin continually, went on to tell of the last
days of their retreat, of Karataev's illness and his death.

He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, as
it were, saw a new meanin in all he had one throuh. Now that he was
tellin it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which a man has
when women listen to him--not clever women who when listenin either try
to remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunity
offers to retell it, or who wish to adopt it to some thouht of their
own and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in their
little mental workshop--but the pleasure iven by real women ifted with
a capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.
Natasha without knowin it was all attention: she did not lose a word,
no sinle quiver in Pierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in
his face, nor a sinle esture. She cauht the unfinished word in its
fliht and took it straiht into her open heart, divinin the secret
meanin of all Pierre's mental travail.

Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she now
saw somethin else that absorbed all her attention. She saw the
possibility of love and happiness between Natasha and Pierre, and the
first thouht of this filled her heart with ladness.

It was three o'clock in the mornin. The footmen came in with sad and
stern faces to chane the candles, but no one noticed them.

Pierre finished his story. Natasha continued to look at him intently
with briht, attentive, and animated eyes, as if tryin to understand
somethin more which he had perhaps left untold. Pierre in shamefaced
and happy confusion lanced occasionally at her, and tried to think what
to say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princess Mary was silent. It
occurred to none of them that it was three o'clock and time to o to
bed.

"People speak of misfortunes and sufferins," remarked Pierre, "but if
at this moment I were asked: 'Would you rather be what you were before
you were taken prisoner, or o throuh all this aain?' then for
heaven's sake let me aain have captivity and horseflesh! We imaine
that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost, but it is
only then that what is new and ood beins. While there is life there is
happiness. There is much, much before us. I say this to you," he added,
turnin to Natasha.

"Yes, yes," she said, answerin somethin quite different. "I too should
wish nothin but to relive it all from the beinnin."

Pierre looked intently at her.

"Yes, and nothin more," said Natasha.

"It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre. "I am not to blame for bein
alive and wishin to live--nor you either."

Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, and
bean to cry.

"What is it, Natasha?" said Princess Mary.

"Nothin, nothin." She smiled at Pierre throuh her tears. "ood niht!
It is time for bed."

Pierre rose and took his leave.

Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom. They talked of
what Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express her opinion of
Pierre nor did Natasha speak of him.

"Well, ood niht, Mary!" said Natasha. "Do you know, I am often afraid
that by not speakin of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "for fear of not
doin justice to our feelins, we foret him."

Princess Mary sihed deeply and thereby acknowleded the justice of
Natasha's remark, but she did not express areement in words.

"Is it possible to foret?" said she.

"It did me so much ood to tell all about it today. It was hard and
painful, but ood, very ood!" said Natasha. "I am sure he really loved
him. That is why I told him... Was it all riht?" she added, suddenly
blushin.

"To tell Pierre? Oh, yes. What a splendid man he is!" said Princess
Mary.

"Do you know, Mary..." Natasha suddenly said with a mischievous smile
such as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a lon time, "he has
somehow rown so clean, smooth, and fresh--as if he had just come out of
a Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moral bath. Isn't it true?"

"Yes," replied Princess Mary. "He has reatly improved."

"With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if he
had come straiht from the bath... Papa used to..."

"I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"
said Princess Mary.

"Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends when they
are quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlike him--
in everythin."

"Yes, but he's wonderful."

"Well, ood niht," said Natasha.

And the same mischievous smile linered for a lon time on her face as
if it had been forotten there.




CHAPTER XVIII

It was a lon time before Pierre could fall asleep that niht. He paced
up and down his room, now turnin his thouhts on a difficult problem
and frownin, now suddenly shruin his shoulders and wincin, and now
smilin happily.

He was thinkin of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love, at one
moment jealous of her past, then reproachin himself for that feelin.
It was already six in the mornin and he still paced up and down the
room.

"Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?
Evidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressin
he ot into bed, happy and aitated but free from hesitation or
indecision.

"Strane and impossible as such happiness seems, I must do everythin
that she and I may be man and wife," he told himself.

A few days previously Pierre had decided to o to Petersbur on the
Friday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask him about
packin for the journey.

"What, to Petersbur? What is Petersbur? Who is there in Petersbur?"
he asked involuntarily, thouh only to himself. "Oh, yes, lon ao
before this happened I did for some reason mean to o to Petersbur," he
reflected. "Why? But perhaps I shall o. What a ood fellow he is and
how attentive, and how he remembers everythin," he thouht, lookin at
Savelich's old face, "and what a pleasant smile he has!"

"Well, Savelich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?" Pierre
asked him.

"What's the ood of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under the
late count--the kindom of heaven be his!--and we have lived under you
too, without ever bein wroned."

"And your children?"

"The children will live just the same. With such masters one can live."

"But what about my heirs?" said Pierre. "Supposin I suddenly marry...
it miht happen," he added with an involuntary smile.

"If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a ood thin."

"How easy he thinks it," thouht Pierre. "He doesn't know how terrible
it is and how danerous. Too soon or too late... it is terrible!"

"So what are your orders? Are you startin tomorrow?" asked Savelich.

"No, I'll put it off for a bit. I'll tell you later. You must forive
the trouble I have put you to," said Pierre, and seein Savelich smile,
he thouht: "But how strane it is that he should not know that now
there is no Petersbur for me, and that that must be settled first of
all! But probably he knows it well enouh and is only pretendin. Shall
I have a talk with him and see what he thinks?" Pierre reflected. "No,
another time."

At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he had been to
see Princess Mary the day before and had there met--"Whom do you think?
Natasha Rostova!"

The princess seemed to see nothin more extraordinary in that than if he
had seen Anna Semenovna.

"Do you know her?" asked Pierre.

"I have seen the princess," she replied. "I heard that they were
arranin a match for her with youn Rostov. It would be a very ood
thin for the Rostovs, they are said to be utterly ruined."

"No; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova?"

"I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a reat pity."

"No, she either doesn't understand or is pretendin," thouht Pierre.
"Better not say anythin to her either."

The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey.

"How kind they all are," thouht Pierre. "What is surprisin is that
they should trouble about these thins now when it can no loner be of
interest to them. And all for me!"

On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, invitin him to send
a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover thins that were to be
returned to their owners that day.

"And this man too," thouht Pierre, lookin into the face of the Chief
of Police. "What a fine, ood-lookin officer and how kind. Fancy
botherin about such trifles now! And they actually say he is not honest
and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn't he take bribes?
That's the way he was brouht up, and everybody does it. But what a
kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me."

Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.

As he drove throuh the streets past the houses that had been burned
down, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesqueness
of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quarters
of the town, stretchin out and concealin one another, reminded him of
the Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen he met and their passeners, the
carpenters cuttin the timber for new houses with axes, the women
hawkers, and the shopkeepers, all looked at him with cheerful beamin
eyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there he is! Let's see what will come of
it!"

At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtful whether he
had really been there the niht before and really seen Natasha and
talked to her. "Perhaps I imained it; perhaps I shall o in and find no
one there." But he had hardly entered the room before he felt her
presence with his whole bein by the loss of his sense of freedom. She
was in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done the
same way as the day before, yet she was quite different. Had she been
like this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment have
failed to reconize her.

She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Prince
Andrew's fiancee. A briht questionin liht shone in her eyes, and on
her face was a friendly and stranely rouish expression.

Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evenin there, but
Princess Mary was oin to vespers and Pierre left the house with her.

Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evenin. Thouh
Princess Mary and Natasha were evidently lad to see their visitor and
thouh all Pierre's interest was now centered in that house, by the
evenin they had talked over everythin and the conversation passed from
one trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so lon
that Princess Mary and Natasha exchaned lances, evidently wonderin
when he would o. Pierre noticed this but could not o. He felt uneasy
and embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not et up and take
his leave.

Princess Mary, foreseein no end to this, rose first, and complainin of
a headache bean to say ood niht.

"So you are oin to Petersbur tomorrow?" she asked.

"No, I am not oin," Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and as
thouh offended. "Yes... no... to Petersbur? Tomorrow--but I won't say
ood-by yet. I will call round in case you have any commissions for me,"
said he, standin before Princess Mary and turnin red, but not takin
his departure.

Natasha ave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the other hand
instead of oin away sank into an armchair, and looked sternly and
intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she had
plainly shown before had now quite passed off. With a deep and lon-
drawn sih she seemed to be prepared for a lenthy talk.

When Natasha left the room Pierre's confusion and awkwardness
immediately vanished and were replaced by eaer excitement. He quickly
moved an armchair toward Princess Mary.

"Yes, I wanted to tell you," said he, answerin her look as if she had
spoken. "Princess, help me! What am I to do? Can I hope? Princess, my
dear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy of her, I
know it's impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be a brother to
her. No, not that, I don't, I can't..."

He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.

"Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence.
"I don't know when I bean to love her, but I have loved her and her
alone all my life, and I love her so that I cannot imaine life without
her. I cannot propose to her at present, but the thouht that perhaps
she miht someday be my wife and that I may be missin that
possibility... that possibility... is terrible. Tell me, can I hope?
Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!" he added after a pause, and
touched her hand as she did not reply.

"I am thinkin of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary. "This
is what I will say. You are riht that to speak to her of love at
present..."

Princess Mary stopped. She was oin to say that to speak of love was
impossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the sudden chane in
Natasha two days before that she would not only not be hurt if Pierre
spoke of his love, but that it was the very thin she wished for.

"To speak to her now wouldn't do," said the princess all the same.

"But what am I to do?"

"Leave it to me," said Princess Mary. "I know..."

Pierre was lookin into Princess Mary's eyes.

"Well?... Well?..." he said.

"I know that she loves... will love you," Princess Mary corrected
herself.

Before her words were out, Pierre had sprun up and with a frihtened
expression seized Princess Mary's hand.

"What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?"

"Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile. "Write to her
parents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish it to
happen and my heart tells me it will."

"No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can't be.... How happy I am!
No, it can't be!" Pierre kept sayin as he kissed Princess Mary's hands.

"o to Petersbur, that will be best. And I will write to you," she
said.

"To Petersbur? o there? Very well, I'll o. But I may come aain
tomorrow?"

Next day Pierre came to say ood-by. Natasha was less animated than she
had been the day before; but that day as he looked at her Pierre
sometimes felt as if he was vanishin and that neither he nor she
existed any loner, that nothin existed but happiness. "Is it possible?
No, it can't be," he told himself at every look, esture, and word that
filled his soul with joy.

When on sayin ood-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not help
holdin it a little loner in his own.

"Is it possible that this hand, that face, those eyes, all this treasure
of feminine charm so strane to me now, is it possible that it will one
day be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am to myself?... No, that's
impossible!..."

"ood-bye, Count," she said aloud. "I shall look forward very much to
your return," she added in a whisper.

And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face which
accompanied them, formed for two months the subject of inexhaustible
memories, interpretations, and happy meditations for Pierre. "'I shall
look forward very much to your return....' Yes, yes, how did she say it?
Yes, 'I shall look forward very much to your return.' Oh, how happy I
am! What is happenin to me? How happy I am!" said Pierre to himself.




CHAPTER XIX

There was nothin in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubled it
durin his courtship of Helene.

He did not repeat to himself with a sickenin feelin of shame the words
he had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and, "Whatever made
me say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he now repeated in imaination
every word that he or Natasha had spoken and pictured every detail of
her face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anythin, but
only to repeat it aain and aain. There was now not a shadow of doubt
in his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was riht or wron.
Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: "Wasn't it all a
dream? Isn't Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and self-
confident? I believe all this--and suddenly Princess Mary will tell her,
and she will be sure to smile and say: 'How strane! He must be deludin
himself. Doesn't he know that he is a man, just a man, while I...? I am
somethin altoether different and hiher.'"

That was the only doubt often troublin Pierre. He did not now make any
plans. The happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if only
he could attain it, it would be the end of all thins. Everythin ended
with that.

A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thouht himself incapable,
possessed him. The whole meanin of life--not for him alone but for the
whole world--seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility of
bein loved by her. At times everybody seemed to him to be occupied with
one thin only--his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him that
other people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried to
hide that pleasure by pretendin to be busy with other interests. In
every word and esture he saw allusions to his happiness. He often
surprised those he met by his sinificantly happy looks and smiles which
seemed to express a secret understandin between him and them. And when
he realized that people miht not be aware of his happiness, he pitied
them with his whole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to them
that all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of
attention.

When it was suested to him that he should enter the civil service, or
when the war or any eneral political affairs were discussed on the
assumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issue of
events, he would listen with a mild and pityin smile and surprise
people by his strane comments. But at this time he saw everybody--both
those who, as he imained, understood the real meanin of life (that is,
what he was feelin) and those unfortunates who evidently did not
understand it--in the briht liht of the emotion that shone within
himself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he met
everythin that was ood and worthy of bein loved.

When dealin with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, her memory
aroused in him no feelin but pity that she had not known the bliss he
now knew. Prince Vasili, who havin obtained a new post and some fresh
decorations was particularly proud at this time, seemed to him a
pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.

Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity. All
the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained true
for him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but when
he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he had
held at this time of his madness and they always proved correct.

"I may have appeared strane and queer then," he thouht, "but I was not
so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had more
insiht than at any other time, and understood all that is worth
understandin in life, because... because I was happy."

Pierre's insanity consisted in not waitin, as he used to do, to
discover personal attributes which he termed "ood qualities" in people
before lovin them; his heart was now overflowin with love, and by
lovin people without cause he discovered indubitable causes for lovin
them.




CHAPTER XX

After Pierre's departure that first evenin, when Natasha had said to
Princess Mary with a aily mockin smile: "He looks just, yes, just as
if he had come out of a Russian bath--in a short coat and with his hair
cropped," somethin hidden and unknown to herself, but irrepressible,
awoke in Natasha's soul.

Everythin: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered. To
her own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose to the
surface and demanded satisfaction. From that evenin she seemed to have
forotten all that had happened to her. She no loner complained of her
position, did not say a word about the past, and no loner feared to
make happy plans for the future. She spoke little of Pierre, but when
Princess Mary mentioned him a lon-extinuished liht once more kindled
in her eyes and her lips curved with a strane smile.


The chane that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princess Mary;
but when she understood its meanin it rieved her. "Can she have loved
my brother so little as to be able to foret him so soon?" she thouht
when she reflected on the chane. But when she was with Natasha she was
not vexed with her and did not reproach her. The reawakened power of
life that had seized Natasha was so evidently irrepressible and
unexpected by her that in her presence Princess Mary felt that she had
no riht to reproach her even in her heart.

Natasha ave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feelin that
she did not try to hide the fact that she was no loner sad, but briht
and cheerful.

When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk with
Pierre, Natasha met her on the threshold.

"He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.

And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to be foriveness for
her joy settled on Natasha's face.

"I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me."

Understandable and touchin as the look with which Natasha azed at her
seemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see her aitation,
these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and his
love.

"But what's to be done? She can't help it," thouht the princess.

And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all that Pierre
had said. On hearin that he was oin to Petersbur Natasha was
astounded.

"To Petersbur!" she repeated as if unable to understand.

But noticin the rieved expression on Princess Mary's face she uessed
the reason of that sadness and suddenly bean to cry.

"Mary," said she, "tell me what I should do! I am afraid of bein bad.
Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me...."

"You love him?"

"Yes," whispered Natasha.

"Then why are you cryin? I am happy for your sake," said Princess Mary,
who because of those tears quite forave Natasha's joy.

"It won't be just yet--someday. Think what fun it will be when I am his
wife and you marry Nicholas!"

"Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you."

They were silent awhile.

"But why o to Petersbur?" Natasha suddenly asked, and hastily replied
to her own question. "But no, no, he must... Yes, Mary, He must...."

FIRST EPILOUE: 1813 - 20




CHAPTER I

Seven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history had
subsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But the
mysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws of
their motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.

Thouh the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movement
of humanity went on as unceasinly as the flow of time. Various roups
of people formed and dissolved, the comin formation and dissolution of
kindoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.

The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore as
previously. It was seethin in its depths. Historic fiures were not
borne by the waves from one shore to another as before. They now seemed
to rotate on one spot. The historical fiures at the head of armies, who
formerly reflected the movement of the masses by orderin wars,
campains, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by political
and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.

The historians call this activity of the historical fiures "the
reaction."

In dealin with this period they sternly condemn the historical
personaes who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as the
reaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander and
Napoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schellin, Fichte, Chateaubriand,
and the rest, pass before their stern judment seat and are acquitted or
condemned accordin to whether they conduced to proress or to reaction.

Accordin to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russia
also, and the chief culprit was Alexander I, the same man who accordin
to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencement
of his rein, bein the savior of Russia.

There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist to
learned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexander for
thins he did wron at this period of his rein.

"He ouht to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case he did
well and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beinnin of
his rein and durin 1812, but acted badly by ivin a constitution to
Poland, formin the Holy Alliance, entrustin power to Arakcheev,
favorin olitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov and Photius. He
also acted badly by concernin himself with the active army and
disbandin the Semenov reiment."

It would take a dozen paes to enumerate all the reproaches the
historians address to him, based on their knowlede of what is ood for
humanity.

What do these reproaches mean?

Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I (the
liberal attempts at the beinnin of his rein, his strule with
Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campain of 1813)
flow from the same sources--the circumstances of his birth, education,
and life--that made his personality what it was and from which the
actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration of
Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?

In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?

It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,
standin on the hihest possible pinnacle of human power with the
blindin liht of history focused upon him; a character exposed to those
stronest of all influences: the intriues, flattery, and self-deception
inseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life felt
a responsibility for all that was happenin in Europe; and not a
fictitious but a live character who like every man had his personal
habits, passions, and impulses toward oodness, beauty, and truth--that
this character--thouh not lackin in virtue (the historians do not
accuse him of that)--had not the same conception of the welfare of
humanity fifty years ao as a present-day professor who from his youth
upwards has been occupied with learnin: that is, with books and
lectures and with takin notes from them.

But even if we assume that fifty years ao Alexander I was mistaken in
his view of what was ood for the people, we must inevitably assume that
the historian who judes Alexander will also after the lapse of some
time turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is ood for humanity.
This assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watchin
the movement of history, we see that every year and with each new
writer, opinion as to what is ood for mankind chanes; so that what
once seemed ood, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what is
more, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as to
what is bad and what is ood in history: some people reard ivin a
constitution to Poland and formin the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in
Alexander, while others reard it as blameworthy.

The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful or
harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.
If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because it does not
aree with his limited understandin of what is ood. Whether the
preservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the lory of the Russian
arms, or the prosperity of the Petersbur and other universities, or the
freedom of Poland or the reatness of Russia, or the balance of power in
Europe, or a certain kind of European culture called "proress" appear
to me to be ood or bad, I must admit that besides these thins the
action of every historic character has other more eneral purposes
inaccessible to me.

But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize all
contradictions and possesses an unchanin standard of ood and bad by
which to try historic characters and events; let us say that Alexander
could have done everythin differently; let us say that with uidance
from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of the
movement of humanity, he miht have arraned matters accordin to the
proram his present accusers would have iven him--of nationality,
freedom, equality, and proress (these, I think, cover the round). Let
us assume that this proram was possible and had then been formulated,
and that Alexander had acted on it. What would then have become of the
activity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed in
the overnment--an activity that in the opinion of the historians was
ood and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there would
have been no life, there would have been nothin.

If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, the possibility of
life is destroyed.




CHAPTER II

If we assume as the historians do that reat men lead humanity to the
attainment of certain ends--the reatness of Russia or of France, the
balance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideas of the
Revolution, eneral proress, or anythin else--then it is impossible to
explain the facts of history without introducin the conceptions of
chance and enius.

If the aim of the European wars at the beinnin of the nineteenth
century had been the arandizement of Russia, that aim miht have been
accomplished without all the precedin wars and without the invasion. If
the aim was the arandizement of France, that miht have been attained
without the Revolution and without the Empire. If the aim was the
dissemination of ideas, the printin press could have accomplished that
much better than warfare. If the aim was the proress of civilization,
it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusin civilization
more expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives.

Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?

Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; enius utilized
it," says history.

But what is chance? What is enius?

The words chance and enius do not denote any really existin thin and
therefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote a certain stae of
understandin of phenomena. I do not know why a certain event occurs; I
think that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk about
chance. I see a force producin effects beyond the scope of ordinary
human aencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk of
enius.

To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evenin into a
special enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the others
must seem to be a enius. And it must appear an astonishin conjunction
of enius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,
who instead of ettin into the eneral fold every evenin oes into a
special enclosure where there are oats--that this very ram, swellin
with fat, is killed for meat.

But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens to them
happens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; they need only
admit that what happens to them may also have purposes beyond their ken,
and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened to
the ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purpose
they are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to the
ram did not happen accidentally, and will no loner need the conceptions
of chance or enius.

Only by renouncin our claim to discern a purpose immediately
intelliible to us, and admittin the ultimate purpose to be beyond our
ken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives of historic
characters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce
(incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and then the words
chance and enius become superfluous.

We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the European
convulsions and that we know only the facts--that is, the murders, first
in France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria, in Spain,
and in Russia--and that the movements from the west to the east and from
the east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, and
not only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and enius in
Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to be
anythin but like other men, and we shall not be oblied to have
recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
these people what they were, but it will be clear that all those small
events were inevitable.

By discardin a claim to knowlede of the ultimate purpose, we shall
clearly perceive that just as one cannot imaine a blossom or seed for
any sinle plant better suited to it than those it produces, so it is
impossible to imaine any two people more completely adapted down to the
smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon and
Alexander with all their antecedents.




CHAPTER III

The fundamental and essential sinificance of the European events of the
beinnin of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass of
the European peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west.
The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east.
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement to
Moscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into a
military roup of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike
military roup of the east, (2) that they should abandon all established
traditions and customs, and (3) that durin their military movement they
should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them
the deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committed
durin that movement.

And beinnin with the French Revolution the old inadequately lare
roup was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and step
by step a roup was formed of larer dimensions with new customs and
traditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the
comin movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.

A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without a
name, and not even a Frenchman, emeres--by what seem the stranest
chances--from amon all the seethin French parties, and without joinin
any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position.

The inorance of his colleaues, the weakness and insinificance of his
opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzlin and self-
confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army. The
brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy, his
opponents' reluctance to fiht, and his own childish audacity and self-
confidence secure him military fame. Innumerable so-called chances
accompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which he falls with the
rulers of France turns to his advantae. His attempts to avoid his
predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russian
service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothin. Durin
the war in Italy he is several times on the vere of destruction and
each time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owin to various diplomatic
considerations the Russian armies--just those which miht have destroyed
his prestie--do not appear upon the scene till he is no loner there.

On his return from Italy he finds the overnment in Paris in a process
of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped out
and destroyed. And by chance an escape from this danerous position
presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition to
Africa. Aain so-called chance accompanies him. Imprenable Malta
surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned with
success. The enemy's fleet, which subsequently did not let a sinle boat
pass, allows his entire army to elude it. In Africa a whole series of
outraes are committed aainst the almost unarmed inhabitants. And the
men who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselves
that this is admirable, this is lory--it resembles Caesar and Alexander
the reat and is therefore ood.

This ideal of lory and randeur--which consists not merely in
considerin nothin wron that one does but in pridin oneself on every
crime one commits, ascribin to it an incomprehensible supernatural
sinificance--that ideal, destined to uide this man and his associates,
had scope for its development in Africa. Whatever he does succeeds. The
plaue does not touch him. The cruelty of murderin prisoners is not
imputed to him as a fault. His childishly rash, uncalled-for, and
inoble departure from Africa, leavin his comrades in distress, is set
down to his credit, and aain the enemy's fleet twice lets him slip
past. When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,
he reaches Paris, the dissolution of the republican overnment, which a
year earlier miht have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and
his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanlements can
only serve to exalt him--and thouh he himself has no plan, he is quite
ready for his new role.

He had no plan, he was afraid of everythin, but the parties snatched at
him and demanded his participation.

He alone--with his ideal of lory and randeur developed in Italy and
Eypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness in
lyin--he alone could justify what had to be done.

He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart from his
will and despite his indecision, his lack of a plan, and all his
mistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizin power and
the conspiracy is crowned with success.

He is pushed into a meetin of the leislature. In alarm he wishes to
flee, considerin himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon and
says senseless thins that should have ruined him. But the once proud
and shrewd rulers of France, feelin that their part is played out, are
even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should have
said to destroy him and retain their power.

Chance, millions of chances, ive him power, and all men as if by
areement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms the characters
of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the character
of Paul I of Russia who reconizes his overnment; chance contrives a
plot aainst him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his
power. Chance puts the Duc d'Enhien in his hands and unexpectedly
causes him to kill him--thereby convincin the mob more forcibly than in
any other way that he had the riht, since he had the miht. Chance
contrives that thouh he directs all his efforts to prepare an
expedition aainst Enland (which would inevitably have ruined him) he
never carries out that intention, but unexpectedly falls upon Mack and
the Austrians, who surrender without a battle. Chance and enius ive
him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only the
French but all Europe--except Enland which does not take part in the
events about to happen--despite their former horror and detestation of
his crimes, now reconize his authority, the title he has iven himself,
and his ideal of randeur and lory, which seems excellent and
reasonable to them all.

As if measurin themselves and preparin for the comin movement, the
western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,
and 1809, ainin strenth and rowin. In 1811 the roup of people that
had formed in France unites into one roup with the peoples of Central
Europe. The strenth of the justification of the man who stands at the
head of the movement rows with the increased size of the roup. Durin
the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all
the crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world can
oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of lory
and randeur. One after another they hasten to display their
insinificance before him. The Kin of Prussia sends his wife to seek
the reat man's mercy; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that
this man receives a dauhter of the Caesars into his bed; the Pope, the
uardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes reliion for the
arandizement of the reat man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himself
for the accomplishment of his role, so much as all those round him who
prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is
happenin and has to happen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraud
he commits, which in the mouths of those around him is not at once
represented as a reat deed. The most suitable fete the ermans can
devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt. Not only is he
reat, but so are his ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and his
brothers-in-law. Everythin is done to deprive him of the remains of his
reason and to prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready so
too are the forces.

The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final oal--Moscow. That
city is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposin
armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Waram. But
suddenly instead of those chances and that enius which hitherto had so
consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the
predestined oal, an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur--from
the cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on fire,
and the frosts--and instead of enius, stupidity and immeasurable
baseness become evident.

The invaders flee, turn back, flee aain, and all the chances are now
not for Napoleon but always aainst him.

A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a
remarkable resemblance to the precedin movement from west to east.
Attempted drives from east to west--similar to the contrary movements of
1805, 1807, and 1809--precede the reat westward movement; there is the
same coalescence into a roup of enormous dimensions; the same adhesion
of the people of Central Europe to the movement; the same hesitation
midway, and the same increasin rapidity as the oal is approached.

Paris, the ultimate oal, is reached. The Napoleonic overnment and army
are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no loner of any account; all his
actions are evidently pitiful and mean, but aain an inexplicable chance
occurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom they reard as the cause of
their sufferins. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and his
craft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten
years previously and one year later--an outlawed briand. But by some
strane chance no one perceives this. His part is not yet ended. The man
who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed briand
is sent to an island two days' sail from France, which for some reason
is presented to him as his dominion, and uards are iven to him and
millions of money are paid him.




CHAPTER IV

The flood of nations beins to subside into its normal channels. The
waves of the reat movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies are
formed in which float the diplomatists, who imaine that they have
caused the floods to abate.

But the smooth sea aain suddenly becomes disturbed. The diplomatists
think that their disareements are the cause of this fresh pressure of
natural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereins; the
position seems to them insoluble. But the wave they feel to be risin
does not come from the quarter they expect. It rises aain from the same
point as before--Paris. The last backwash of the movement from the west
occurs: a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable
diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of
history.

The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, without any
conspiracy and without soldiers. Any uard miht arrest him, but by
strane chance no one does so and all rapturously reet the man they
cursed the day before and will curse aain a month later.

This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.

That act is performed.

The last role is played. The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his
powder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.

And some years pass durin which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself in
solitude on his island, justifyin his actions by intriues and lies
when the justification is no loner needed, and displayin to the whole
world what it was that people had mistaken for strenth as lon as an
unseen hand directed his actions.

The manaer havin brouht the drama to a close and stripped the actor
shows him to us.

"See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not he
but I who moved you?"

But dazed by the force of the movement, it was lon before people
understood this.

Still reater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of
Alexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from
east to west.

What was needed for him who, overshadowin others, stood at the head of
that movement from east to west?

What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European
affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moral
superiority over those sovereins of the day who co-operated with him; a
mild and attractive personality; and a personal rievance aainst
Napoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; all this had been
prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life: his education,
his early liberalism, the advisers who surrounded him, and by
Austerlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.

Durin the national war he was inactive because he was not needed. But
as soon as the necessity for a eneral European war presented itself he
appeared in his place at the iven moment and, unitin the nations of
Europe, led them to the oal.

The oal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all
possible power. How does he use it?

Alexander I--the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his early years
had striven only for his people's welfare, the oriinator of the liberal
innovations in his fatherland--now that he seemed to possess the utmost
power and therefore to have the possibility of brinin about the
welfare of his peoples--at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawin
up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy
had he retained power--Alexander I, havin fulfilled his mission and
feelin the hand of od upon him, suddenly reconizes the insinificance
of that supposed power, turns away from it, and ives it into the hands
of contemptible men whom he despises, sayin only:

"Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like the
rest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of od."

As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself, and
yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to
comprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet
has them to serve a eneral purpose incomprehensible to man.

A bee settlin on a flower has stun a child. And the child is afraid of
bees and declares that bees exist to stin people. A poet admires the
bee suckin from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the
frarance of flowers. A beekeeper, seein the bee collect pollen from
flowers and carry it to the hive, says that it exists to ather honey.
Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely says
that the bee athers pollen dust to feed the youn bees and rear a
queen, and that it exists to perpetuate its race. A botanist notices
that the bee flyin with the pollen of a male flower to a pistil
fertilizes the latter, and sees in this the purpose of the bee's
existence. Another, observin the miration of plants, notices that the
bee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of the
bee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,
the second, or any of the processes the human mind can discern. The
hiher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes, the
more obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond our
comprehension.

All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee to
other manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose of historic
characters and nations.




CHAPTER V

Natasha's weddin to Bezukhov, which took place in 1813, was the last
happy event in the family of the old Rostovs. Count Ilya Rostov died
that same year and, as always happens, after the father's death the
family roup broke up.

The events of the previous year: the burnin of Moscow and the fliht
from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya's death,
and the old countess' rief fell blow after blow on the old count's
head. He seemed to be unable to understand the meanin of all these
events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expectin and
invitin further blows which would finish him. He seemed now frihtened
and distrauht and now unnaturally animated and enterprisin.

The arranements for Natasha's marriae occupied him for a while. He
ordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, but
his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary it
evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.

When Pierre and his wife had left, he rew very quiet and bean to
complain of depression. A few days later he fell ill and took to his
bed. He realized from the first that he would not et up aain, despite
the doctor's encouraement. The countess passed a fortniht in an
armchair by his pillow without undressin. Every time she ave him his
medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his last day,
sobbin, he asked her and his absent son to forive him for havin
dissipated their property--that bein the chief fault of which he was
conscious. After receivin communion and unction he quietly died; and
next day a thron of acquaintances who came to pay their last respects
to the deceased filled the house rented by the Rostovs. All these
acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had so
often lauhed at him, now said, with a common feelin of self-reproach
and emotion, as if justifyin themselves: "Well, whatever he may have
been he was a most worthy man. You don't meet such men nowadays.... And
which of us has not weaknesses of his own?"

It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved that it was
impossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that he
unexpectedly died.

Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of his
father's death reached him. He at once resined his commission, and
without waitin for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went to
Moscow. The state of the count's affairs became quite obvious a month
after his death, surprisin everyone by the immense total of small debts
the existence of which no one had suspected. The debts amounted to
double the value of the property.

Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance. But
he rearded such a refusal as a slur on his father's memory, which he
held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusin and accepted the
inheritance toether with the obliation to pay the debts.

The creditors who had so lon been silent, restrained by a vaue but
powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count's
careless ood nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once. As
always happens in such cases rivalry spran up as to which should et
paid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes iven them
as presents now became the most exactin of the creditors. Nicholas was
allowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemed to pity the
old man--the cause of their losses (if they were losses)--now
remorselessly pursued the youn heir who had voluntarily undertaken the
debts and was obviously not uilty of contractin them.

Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold by
auction for half its value, and half the debts still remained unpaid.
Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his brother-in-
law Bezukhov to pay off debts he rearded as enuinely due for value
received. And to avoid bein imprisoned for the remainder, as the
creditors threatened, he re-entered the overnment service.

He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at
the next vacancy, for his mother now clun to him as her one hold on
life; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow amon people who
had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,
he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform of
which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonya to a small
house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.

Natasha and Pierre were livin in Petersbur at the time and had no
clear idea of Nicholas' circumstances. Havin borrowed money from his
brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.
His position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelve
hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, and Sonya,
but had to shield his mother from knowlede of their poverty. The
countess could not conceive of life without the luxurious conditions she
had been used to from childhood and, unable to realize how hard it was
for her son, kept demandin now a carriae (which they did not keep) to
send for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, or
wine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natasha or
Sonya, or for Nicholas himself.

Sonya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with her
whims and secret ill-will, and helped Nicholas to conceal their poverty
from the old countess. Nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted to
Sonya for all she was doin for his mother and reatly admired her
patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.

He seemed in his heart to reproach her for bein too perfect, and
because there was nothin to reproach her with. She had all that people
are valued for, but little that could have made him love her. He felt
that the more he valued her the less he loved her. He had taken her at
her word when she wrote ivin him his freedom and now behaved as if all
that had passed between them had been lon forotten and could never in
any case be renewed.

Nicholas' position became worse and worse. The idea of puttin somethin
aside out of his salary proved a dream. Not only did he not save
anythin, but to comply with his mother's demands he even incurred some
small debts. He could see no way out of this situation. The idea of
marryin some rich woman, which was suested to him by his female
relations, was repunant to him. The other way out--his mother's death--
never entered his head. He wished for nothin and hoped for nothin, and
deep in his heart experienced a loomy and stern satisfaction in an
uncomplainin endurance of his position. He tried to avoid his old
acquaintances with their commiseration and offensive offers of
assistance; he avoided all distraction and recreation, and even at home
did nothin but play cards with his mother, pace silently up and down
the room, and smoke one pipe after another. He seemed carefully to
cherish within himself the loomy mood which alone enabled him to endure
his position.




CHAPTER VI

At the beinnin of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow. From reports
current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, and how "the
son has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people were sayin.

"I never expected anythin else of him," said Princess Mary to herself,
feelin a joyous sense of her love for him. Rememberin her friendly
relations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost a member of the
family, she thouht it her duty to o to see them. But rememberin her
relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doin so. Makin a
reat effort she did however o to call on them a few weeks after her
arrival in Moscow.

Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess' room could only be
reached throuh his. But instead of bein reeted with pleasure as she
had expected, at his first lance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,
proud expression she had not seen on it before. He inquired about her
health, led the way to his mother, and havin sat there for five minutes
left the room.

When the princess came out of the countess' room Nicholas met her aain,
and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.
To her remarks about his mother's health he made no reply. "What's that
to you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed to say.

"Why does she come prowlin here? What does she want? I can't bear these
ladies and all these civilities!" said he aloud in Sonya's presence,
evidently unable to repress his vexation, after the princess' carriae
had disappeared.

"Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly able to
conceal her deliht. "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"

Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speakin of the princess any
more. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times a
day.

She san her praises, insisted that her son must call on her, expressed
a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when she
bean to talk about her.

Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess,
but his silence irritated her.

"She is a very admirable and excellent youn woman," said she, "and you
must o and call on her. You would at least be seein somebody, and I
think it must be dull for you only seein us."

"But I don't in the least want to, Mamma."

"You used to want to, and now you don't. Really I don't understand you,
my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to see anyone."

"But I never said I was dull."

"Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her. She is a very
admirable youn woman and you always liked her, but now suddenly you
have ot some notion or other in your head. You hide everythin from
me."

"Not at all, Mamma."

"If I were askin you to do somethin disareeable now--but I only ask
you to return a call. One would think mere politeness required it....
Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any more since you
have secrets from your mother."

"Well, then, I'll o if you wish it."

"It doesn't matter to me. I only wish it for your sake."

Nicholas sihed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for a
patience, tryin to divert his mother's attention to another topic.

The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, and the
day after that.

After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception by
Nicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been riht in
not wishin to be the first to call.

"I expected nothin else," she told herself, callin her pride to her
aid. "I have nothin to do with him and I only wanted to see the old
lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under many
obliations."

But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feelin akin
to remorse troubled her when she thouht of her visit. Thouh she had
firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs aain and to foret the whole
matter, she felt herself all the time in an awkward position. And when
she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was her
relation to Rostov. His cold, polite manner did not express his feelin
for her (she knew that) but it concealed somethin, and until she could
discover what that somethin was, she felt that she could not be at
ease.

One day in midwinter when sittin in the schoolroom attendin to her
nephew's lessons, she was informed that Rostov had called. With a firm
resolution not to betray herself and not show her aitation, she sent
for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawin room.

Her first lance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come to
fulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintain
the tone in which he addressed her.

They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, of the
latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety had
elapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas ot up to say ood-by.

With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained the
conversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,
she was so tired of talkin of what did not interest her, and her mind
was so full of the question why she alone was ranted so little
happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, her
luminous eyes azin fixedly before her, not noticin that he had risen.

Nicholas lanced at her and, wishin to appear not to notice her
abstraction, made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then aain
looked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look of
sufferin on her entle face. He suddenly felt sorry for her and was
vauely conscious that he miht be the cause of the sadness her face
expressed. He wished to help her and say somethin pleasant, but could
think of nothin to say.

"ood-bye, Princess!" said he.

She started, flushed, and sihed deeply.

"Oh, I be your pardon," she said as if wakin up. "Are you oin
already, Count? Well then, ood-by! Oh, but the cushion for the
countess!"

"Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and she
left the room.

They both sat silent, with an occasional lance at one another.

"Yes, Princess," said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, "it doesn't
seem lon ao since we first met at Boucharovo, but how much water has
flowed since then! In what distress we all seemed to be then, yet I
would ive much to brin back that time... but there's no brinin it
back."

Princess Mary azed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones as
he said this. She seemed to be tryin to fathom the hidden meanin of
his words which would explain his feelin for her.

"Yes, yes," said she, "but you have no reason to reret the past, Count.
As I understand your present life, I think you will always recall it
with satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fills it now..."

"I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly. "On the
contrary I continually reproach myself.... But this is not at all an
interestin or cheerful subject."

His face aain resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But the
princess had cauht a limpse of the man she had known and loved, and it
was to him that she now spoke.

"I thouht you would allow me to tell you this," she said. "I had come
so near to you... and to all your family that I thouht you would not
consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," and suddenly her
voice trembled. "I don't know why," she continued, recoverin herself,
"but you used to be different, and..."

"There are a thousand reasons why," layin special emphasis on the why.
"Thank you, Princess," he added softly. "Sometimes it is hard."

"So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary's soul.
"No, it was not only that ay, kind, and frank look, not only that
handsome exterior, that I loved in him. I divined his noble, resolute,
self-sacrificin spirit too," she said to herself. "Yes, he is poor now
and I am rich.... Yes, that's the only reason.... Yes, were it not for
that..." And rememberin his former tenderness, and lookin now at his
kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness.

"But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously movin closer to
him. "Why? Tell me. You must tell me!"

He was silent.

"I don't understand your why, Count," she continued, "but it's hard for
me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our former
friendship. And that hurts me." There were tears in her eyes and in her
voice. "I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hard
for me to bear.... Excuse me, ood-by!" and suddenly she bean to cry
and was hurryin from the room.

"Princess, for od's sake!" he exclaimed, tryin to stop her.
"Princess!"

She turned round. For a few seconds they azed silently into one
another's eyes--and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenly
became possible, inevitable, and very near.




CHAPTER VII

In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to Bald
Hills with his wife, his mother, and Sonya.

Within four years he had paid off all his remainin debts without
sellin any of his wife's property, and havin received a small
inheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well.

In another three years, by 1820, he had so manaed his affairs that he
was able to buy a small estate adjoinin Bald Hills and was neotiatin
to buy back Otradnoe--that bein his pet dream.

Havin started farmin from necessity, he soon rew so devoted to it
that it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation. Nicholas was
a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the Enlish ones
then comin into voue. He lauhed at theoretical treatises on estate
manaement, disliked factories, the raisin of expensive products, and
the buyin of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of any
particular part of the work on his estate. He always had before his
mind's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it. The
chief thin in his eyes was not the nitroen in the soil, nor the oxyen
in the air, nor manures, nor special plows, but that most important
aent by which nitroen, oxyen, manure, and plow were made effective--
the peasant laborer. When Nicholas first bean farmin and bean to
understand its different branches, it was the serf who especially
attracted his attention. The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool,
but also a jude of farmin and an end in himself. At first he watched
the serfs, tryin to understand their aims and what they considered ood
and bad, and only pretended to direct them and ive orders while in
reality learnin from them their methods, their manner of speech, and
their judment of what was ood and bad. Only when he had understood the
peasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk their lanuae, to
rasp the hidden meanin of their words, and felt akin to them did he
bein boldly to manae his serfs, that is, to perform toward them the
duties demanded of him. And Nicholas' manaement produced very brilliant
results.

uided by some ift of insiht, on takin up the manaement of the
estates he at once unerrinly appointed as bailiff, villae elder, and
deleate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had they
had the riht to choose, and these posts never chaned hands. Before
analyzin the properties of manure, before enterin into the debit and
credit (as he ironically called it), he found out how many cattle the
peasants had and increased the number by all possible means. He kept the
peasant families toether in the larest roups possible, not allowin
the family roups to divide into separate households. He was hard alike
on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to et them expelled
from the commune.

He was as careful of the sowin and reapin of the peasants' hay and
corn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown and
harvested so early and so well, or ot so ood a return, as did
Nicholas.

He disliked havin anythin to do with the domestic serfs--the "drones"
as he called them--and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity. When
a decision had to be taken reardin a domestic serf, especially if one
had to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody in
the house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscripted
instead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation. He
never felt any hesitation in dealin with the peasants. He knew that his
every decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions.

He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or to
make thins easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclined
to do so. He could not have said by what standard he juded what he
should or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite in
his own mind.

Often, speakin with vexation of some failure or irreularity, he would
say: "What can one do with our Russian peasants?" and imained that he
could not bear them.

Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with his whole
soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one
way and manner of farmin which produced ood results.

Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's and reretted
that she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys and
vexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien. She
could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when,
after ettin up at daybreak and spendin the whole mornin in the
fields or on the threshin floor, he returned from the sowin or mowin
or reapin to have tea with her. She did not understand why he spoke
with such admiration and deliht of the farmin of the thrifty and well-
to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin, who with his family had carted corn all
niht; or of the fact that his (Nicholas') sheaves were already stacked
before anyone else had his harvest in. She did not understand why he
stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustache
and winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain bean to fall on the dry
and thirsty shoots of the youn oats, or why when the wind carried away
a threatenin cloud durin the hay harvest he would return from the
barn, flushed, sunburned, and perspirin, with a smell of wormwood and
entian in his hair and, leefully rubbin his hands, would say: "Well,
one more day and my rain and the peasants' will all be under cover."

Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always ready to
anticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when she brouht
him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her to
be excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, should obstinately
refuse her, anrily askin her not to interfere in what was not her
business. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately and
which had laws she had not fathomed.

Sometimes when, tryin to understand him, she spoke of the ood work he
was doin for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in the least;
it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their ood! That's
all poetry and old wives' talk--all that doin ood to one's neihbor!
What I want is that our children should not have to o bein. I must
put our affairs in order while I am alive, that's all. And to do that,
order and strictness are essential.... That's all about it!" said he,
clenchin his viorous fist. "And fairness, of course," he added, "for
if the peasant is naked and hunry and has only one miserable horse, he
can do no ood either for himself or for me."

And all Nicholas did was fruitful--probably just because he refused to
allow himself to think that he was doin ood to others for virtue's
sake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neihborin estates came
to be him to buy them, and lon after his death the memory of his
administration was devoutly preserved amon the serfs. "He was a
master... the peasants' affairs first and then his own. Of course he was
not to be trifled with either--in a word, he was a real master!"




CHAPTER VIII

One matter connected with his manaement sometimes worried Nicholas, and
that was his quick temper toether with his old hussar habit of makin
free use of his fists. At first he saw nothin reprehensible in this,
but in the second year of his marriae his view of that form of
punishment suddenly chaned.

Once in summer he had sent for the villae elder from Boucharovo, a man
who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused of
dishonesty and various irreularities. Nicholas went out into the porch
to question him, and immediately after the elder had iven a few replies
the sound of cries and blows were heard. On returnin to lunch Nicholas
went up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low over her embroidery
frame, and as usual bean to tell her what he had been doin that
mornin. Amon other thins he spoke of the Boucharovo elder. Countess
Mary turned red and then pale, but continued to sit with head bowed and
lips compressed and ave her husband no reply.

"Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, rowin hot aain at the mere
recollection of him. "If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...
But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.

Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily looked
down aain and her lips puckered.

"Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"

The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was in
tears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow or
pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.

The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no loner restrain herself
and bean to cry.

"Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!" and
she covered her face with her hands.

Nicholas said nothin. He flushed crimson, left her side, and paced up
and down the room. He understood what she was weepin about, but could
not in his heart at once aree with her that what he had rearded from
childhood as quite an everyday event was wron. "Is it just
sentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she riht?" he asked himself.
Before he had solved that point he lanced aain at her face filled with
love and pain, and he suddenly realized that she was riht and that he
had lon been sinnin aainst himself.

"Mary," he said softly, oin up to her, "it will never happen aain; I
ive you my word. Never," he repeated in a tremblin voice like a boy
askin for foriveness.

The tears flowed faster still from the countess' eyes. She took his hand
and kissed it.

"Nicholas, when did you break your cameo?" she asked to chane the
subject, lookin at his finer on which he wore a rin with a cameo of
Laocoon's head.

"Today--it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don't remind me of it!" and
aain he flushed. "I ive you my word of honor it shan't occur aain,
and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to the broken
rin.

After that, when in discussions with his villae elders or stewards the
blood rushed to his face and his fists bean to clench, Nicholas would
turn the broken rin on his finer and would drop his eyes before the
man who was makin him anry. But he did foret himself once or twice
within a twelvemonth, and then he would o and confess to his wife, and
would aain promise that this should really be the very last time.

"Mary, you must despise me!" he would say. "I deserve it."

"You should o, o away at once, if you don't feel stron enouh to
control yourself," she would reply sadly, tryin to comfort her husband.

Amon the entry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.
He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class, and
consequently some thouht him proud and others thouht him stupid. The
whole summer, from sprin sowin to harvest, he was busy with the work
on his farm. In autumn he ave himself up to huntin with the same
business-like seriousness--leavin home for a month, or even two, with
his hunt. In winter he visited his other villaes or spent his time
readin. The books he read were chiefly historical, and on these he
spent a certain sum every year. He was collectin, as he said, a serious
library, and he made it a rule to read throuh all the books he bouht.
He would sit in his study with a rave air, readin--a task he first
imposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habit
affordin him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of bein
occupied with serious matters. In winter, except for business
excursions, he spent most of his time at home makin himself one with
his family and enterin into all the details of his children's relations
with their mother. The harmony between him and his wife rew closer and
closer and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.

From the time of his marriae Sonya had lived in his house. Before that,
Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself and
Sonya, blamin himself and commendin her. He had asked Princess Mary to
be entle and kind to his cousin. She thorouhly realized the wron he
had done Sonya, felt herself to blame toward her, and imained that her
wealth had influenced Nicholas' choice. She could not find fault with
Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-will
toward her which she could not overcome.

Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about her
own injustice toward her.

"You know," said Natasha, "you have read the ospels a reat deal--there
is a passae in them that just fits Sonya."

"What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised.

"'To him that hath shall be iven, and from him that hath not shall be
taken away.' You remember? She is one that hath not; why, I don't know.
Perhaps she lacks eotism, I don't know, but from her is taken away, and
everythin has been taken away. Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.
Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her, but I always had a
sort of presentiment that it would not come off. She is a sterile
flower, you know--like some strawberry blossoms. Sometimes I am sorry
for her, and sometimes I think she doesn't feel it as you or I would."

Thouh Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the ospel must be
understood differently, yet lookin at Sonya she areed with Natasha's
explanation. It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her position
tryin, and had rown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower.
She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as a
whole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to the people but to the
home. She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,
was always ready to render the small services for which she had a ift,
and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficient
ratitude.

The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, thouh not on the same
scale as under the old prince.

The buildins, beun under straitened circumstances, were more than
simple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,
plastered only inside. It had bare deal floors and was furnished with
very simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made by their own
serf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house was spacious and
had rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. Whole
families of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relations sometimes came to
Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed for
months. Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdays
of the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would ather there for a day
or two. The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with its
ordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,
provided out of the produce of the estate.




CHAPTER IX

It was the eve of St. Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820. Natasha had
been stayin at her brother's with her husband and children since early
autumn. Pierre had one to Petersbur on business of his own for three
weeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seven weeks and was
expected back every minute.

Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retired eneral
Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was stayin with the Rostovs this fifth of
December.

On the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full of
visitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchane his Tartar tunic for a
tail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive to the
new church he had built, and then receive visitors who would come to
conratulate him, offer them refreshments, and talk about the elections
of the nobility; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve of
that day in his usual way. He examined the bailiff's accounts of the
villae in Ryazan which beloned to his wife's nephew, wrote two
business letters, and walked over to the ranaries, cattle yards and
stables before dinner. Havin taken precautions aainst the eneral
drunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a reat saint's
day, he returned to dinner, and without havin time for a private talk
with his wife sat down at the lon table laid for twenty persons, at
which the whole household had assembled. At that table were his mother,
his mother's old lady companion Belova, his wife, their three children
with their overness and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya,
Denisov, Natasha, her three children, their overness, and old Michael
Ivanovich, the late prince's architect, who was livin on in retirement
at Bald Hills.

Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husband took
his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after takin up
his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and winelass standin
before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when he
came in to dinner straiht from the farm--especially before the soup.
Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and when she herself was in a
ood frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and then
bean to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for his
ill-humor. But today she quite forot that and was hurt that he should
be anry with her without any reason, and she felt unhappy. She asked
him where he had been. He replied. She aain inquired whether everythin
was oin well on the farm. Her unnatural tone made him wince
unpleasantly and he replied hastily.

"Then I'm not mistaken," thouht Countess Mary. "Why is he cross with
me?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wished
to end the conversation. She knew her remarks sounded unnatural, but
could not refrain from askin some more questions.

Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became eneral and
lively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left the table
and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out her
hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was anry with her.

"You always have such strane fancies! I didn't even think of bein
anry," he replied.

But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am anry but I won't
tell you why."

Nicholas and his wife lived toether so happily that even Sonya and the
old countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them to disaree,
could find nothin to reproach them with; but even they had their
moments of antaonism. Occasionally, and it was always just after they
had been happiest toether, they suddenly had a feelin of estranement
and hostility, which occurred most frequently durin Countess Mary's
prenancies, and this was such a time.

"Well, messieurs et mesdames," said Nicholas loudly and with apparent
cheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose to
vex her), "I have been on my feet since six this mornin. Tomorrow I
shall have to suffer, so today I'll o and rest."

And without a word to his wife he went to the little sittin room and
lay down on the sofa.

"That's always the way," thouht Countess Mary. "He talks to everyone
except me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him, especially when I
am in this condition." She looked down at her expanded fiure and in the
lass at her pale, sallow, emaciated face in which her eyes now looked
larer than ever.

And everythin annoyed her--Denisov's shoutin and lauhter, Natasha's
talk, and especially a quick lance Sonya ave her.

Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feelin
irritated.

Havin sat awhile with her visitors without understandin anythin of
what they were sayin, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.

The children were playin at "oin to Moscow" in a carriae made of
chairs and invited her to o with them. She sat down and played with
them a little, but the thouht of her husband and his unreasonable
crossness worried her. She ot up and, walkin on tiptoe with
difficulty, went to the small sittin room.

"Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," she said
to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitatin his mother,
followed her on tiptoe. She did not notice him.

"Mary, dear, I think he is asleep--he was so tired," said Sonya, meetin
her in the lare sittin room (it seemed to Countess Mary that she
crossed her path everywhere). "Andrew may wake him."

Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew followin her, felt that
Sonya was riht, and for that very reason flushed and with evident
difficulty refrained from sayin somethin harsh. She made no reply, but
to avoid obeyin Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and went
to the door. Sonya went away by another door. From the room in which
Nicholas was sleepin came the sound of his even breathin, every
slihtest tone of which was familiar to his wife. As she listened to it
she saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and his
whole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the niht
when he slept. Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat. And at
that moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door: "Papa! Mamma's
standin here!" Countess Mary turned pale with friht and made sins to
the boy. He rew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible to
Countess Mary. She knew how Nicholas disliked bein waked. Then throuh
the door she heard Nicholas clearin his throat aain and stirrin, and
his voice said crossly:

"I can't et a moment's peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did you brin
him here?"

"I only came in to look and did not notice... forive me..."

Nicholas couhed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from the
door and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later little
black-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, havin learned from
her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sittin room, ran
to her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed little irl boldly
opened the creakin door, went up to the sofa with eneretic steps of
her sturdy little les, and havin examined the position of her father,
who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the hand
which lay under his head. Nicholas turned with a tender smile on his
face.

"Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frihtened whisper from the
door. "Papa wants to sleep."

"No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha with
conviction. "He's lauhin."

Nicholas lowered his les, rose, and took his dauhter in his arms.

"Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.

She went in and sat down by her husband.

"I did not notice him followin me," she said timidly. "I just looked
in."

Holdin his little irl with one arm, Nicholas lanced at his wife and,
seein her uilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissed
her hair.

"May I kiss Mamma?" he asked Natasha.

Natasha smiled bashfully.

"Aain!" she commanded, pointin with a peremptory esture to the spot
where Nicholas had placed the kiss.

"I don't know why you think I am cross," said Nicholas, replyin to the
question he knew was in his wife's mind.

"You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are like
that. It always seems to me..."

"Mary, don't talk nonsense. You ouht to be ashamed of yourself!" he
said aily.

"It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain... always...
and now... in this cond..."

"Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it's love that
makes us see beauty. It is only Malvinas and women of that kind who are
loved for their beauty. But do I love my wife? I don't love her, but...
I don't know how to put it. Without you, or when somethin comes between
us like this, I seem lost and can't do anythin. Now do I love my
finer? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!"

"I'm not like that myself, but I understand. So you're not anry with
me?"

"Awfully anry!" he said, smilin and ettin up. And smoothin his hair
he bean to pace the room.

"Do you know, Mary, what I've been thinkin?" he bean, immediately
thinkin aloud in his wife's presence now that they had made it up.

He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him. He did not care. A
thouht had occurred to him and so it beloned to her also. And he told
her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till sprin.

Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, and in
her turn bean thinkin aloud. Her thouhts were about the children.

"You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointin to
little Natasha. "You reproach us women with bein illoical. Here is our
loic. I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he's lauhin.'
And she was riht," said Countess Mary with a happy smile.

"Yes, yes." And Nicholas, takin his little dauhter in his stron hand,
lifted her hih, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the les, and
paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happiness
on the faces of both father and dauhter.

"But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one," his wife
whispered in French.

"Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show..."

At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps in
the hall and anteroom, as if someone had arrived.

"Somebody has come."

"I am sure it is Pierre. I will o and see," said Countess Mary and left
the room.

In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to ive his little dauhter a
allop round the room. Out of breath, he took the lauhin child quickly
from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart. His capers reminded him
of dancin, and lookin at the child's round happy little face he
thouht of what she would be like when he was an old man, takin her
into society and dancin the mazurka with her as his old father had
danced Daniel Cooper with his dauhter.

"It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-enterin the room
a few minutes later. "Now our Natasha has come to life. You should have
seen her ecstasy, and how he cauht it for havin stayed away so lon.
Well, come alon now, quick, quick! It's time you two were parted," she
added, lookin smilinly at the little irl who clun to her father.

Nicholas went out holdin the child by the hand.

Countess Mary remained in the sittin room.

"I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy," she
whispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same time she
sihed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as thouh she felt,
throuh her happiness, that there is another sort of happiness
unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thouht at that
instant.




CHAPTER X

Natasha had married in the early sprin of 1813, and in 1820 already had
three dauhters besides a son for whom she had loned and whom she was
now nursin. She had rown stouter and broader, so that it was difficult
to reconize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natasha of
former days. Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft, and
serene expression. In her face there was none of the ever-lowin
animation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm. Now
her face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was not
visible at all. All that struck the eye was a stron, handsome, and
fertile woman. The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now. That
happened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,
or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and Countess Mary spoke of
Prince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imained
was jealous of Prince Andrew's memory), or on the rare occasions when
somethin happened to induce her to sin, a practice she had quite
abandoned since her marriae. At the rare moments when the old fire did
kindle in her handsome, fully developed body she was even more
attractive than in former days.

Since their marriae Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, in
Petersbur, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is to
say, in Nicholas' house. The youn Countess Bezukhova was not often seen
in society, and those who met her there were not pleased with her and
found her neither attractive nor amiable. Not that Natasha liked
solitude--she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thouht
that she did not--but with her prenancies, her confinements, the
nursin of her children, and sharin every moment of her husband's life,
she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncin
society. All who had known Natasha before her marriae wondered at the
chane in her as at somethin extraordinary. Only the old countess with
her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha's outbursts had been
due to her need of children and a husband--as she herself had once
exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest--and her mother
was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never
understood Natasha, and she kept sayin that she had always known that
Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother.

"Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all
bounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd."

Natasha did not follow the olden rule advocated by clever folk,
especially by the French, which says that a irl should not let herself
o when she marries, should not nelect her accomplishments, should be
even more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, and
should fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became her
husband. Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,
of which her sinin had been an unusually powerful part. She ave it up
just because it was so powerfully seductive. She took no pains with her
manners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to show
herself to her husband in her most becomin attitudes, or to avoid
inconveniencin him by bein too exactin. She acted in contradiction to
all those rules. She felt that the allurements instinct had formerly
tauht her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of her
husband, to whom she had from the first moment iven herself up
entirely--that is, with her whole soul, leavin no corner of it hidden
from him. She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained by
the poetic feelins that had attracted him to her, but by somethin
else--indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.

To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sin romantic
sons to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strane as to adorn
herself to attract herself. To adorn herself for others miht perhaps
have been areeable--she did not know--but she had no time at all for
it. The chief reason for devotin no time either to sinin, to dress,
or to choosin her words was that she really had no time to spare for
these thins.

We know that man has the faculty of becomin completely absorbed in a
subject however trivial it may be, and that there is no subject so
trivial that it will not row to infinite proportions if one's entire
attention is devoted to it.

The subject which wholly enrossed Natasha's attention was her family:
that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belon
entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,
brin into the world, nurse, and brin up.

And the deeper she penetrated, not with her mind only but with her whole
soul, her whole bein, into the subject that absorbed her, the larer
did that subject row and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers
appear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thin and yet
was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary.

There were then as now conversations and discussions about women's
rihts, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rihts,
thouh these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now; but
these topics were not merely uninterestin to Natasha, she positively
did not understand them.

These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothin in
marriae but the pleasure married people et from one another, that is,
only the beinnins of marriae and not its whole sinificance, which
lies in the family.

Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question of
how to et the reatest ratification from one's dinner, did not then
and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the
nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriae is the family.

If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eats two
dinners at once may perhaps et more enjoyment but will not attain his
purpose, for his stomach will not diest the two dinners.

If the purpose of marriae is the family, the person who wishes to have
many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but in that
case will not have a family.

If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriae is the
family, the whole question resolves itself into not eatin more than one
can diest, and not havin more wives or husbands than are needed for
the family--that is, one wife or one husband. Natasha needed a husband.
A husband was iven her and he ave her a family. And she not only saw
no need of any other or better husband, but as all the powers of her
soul were intent on servin that husband and family, she could not
imaine and saw no interest in imainin how it would be if thins were
different.

Natasha did not care for society in eneral, but prized the more the
society of her relatives--Countess Mary, and her brother, her mother,
and Sonya. She valued the company of those to whom she could come
stridin disheveled from the nursery in her dressin own, and with
joyful face show a yellow instead of a reen stain on baby's napkin, and
from whom she could hear reassurin words to the effect that baby was
much better.

To such an extent had Natasha let herself o that the way she dressed
and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy--she was
jealous of Sonya, of the overness, and of every woman, pretty or plain-
-were habitual subjects of jest to those about her. The eneral opinion
was that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, which was really true. From
the very first days of their married life Natasha had announced her
demands. Pierre was reatly surprised by his wife's view, to him a
perfectly novel one, that every moment of his life beloned to her and
to the family. His wife's demands astonished him, but they also
flattered him, and he submitted to them.

Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared not
flirt with, but dared not even speak smilinly to, any other woman; did
not dare dine at the club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on a
whim, and did not dare absent himself for any lenth of time, except on
business--in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits, which
she did not in the least understand but to which she attributed reat
importance. To make up for this, at home Pierre had the riht to
reulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose. At
home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,
and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied--that is,
was readin or writin in his study. Pierre had but to show a partiality
for anythin to et just what he liked done always. He had only to
express a wish and Natasha would jump up and run to fulfill it.

The entire household was overned accordin to Pierre's supposed orders,
that is, by his wishes which Natasha tried to uess. Their way of life
and place of residence, their acquaintances and ties, Natasha's
occupations, the children's upbrinin, were all selected not merely
with reard to Pierre's expressed wishes, but to what Natasha from the
thouhts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be. And she
deduced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and havin once
arrived at them clun to them tenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted to
chane his mind she would fiht him with his own weapons.

Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of their
first child who was delicate, when they had to chane the wet nurse
three times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told her
of Rousseau's view, with which he quite areed, that to have a wet nurse
is unnatural and harmful. When her next baby was born, despite the
opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband himself--
who were all viorously opposed to her nursin her baby herself, a thin
then unheard of and considered injurious--she insisted on havin her own
way, and after that nursed all her babies herself.

It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wife
would have a dispute, but lon afterwards Pierre to his surprise and
deliht would find in his wife's ideas and actions the very thouht
aainst which she had arued, but divested of everythin superfluous
that in the excitement of the dispute he had added when expressin his
opinion.

After seven years of marriae Pierre had the joyous and firm
consciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he saw
himself reflected in his wife. He felt the ood and bad within himself
inextricably minled and overlappin. But only what was really ood in
him was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite ood was rejected.
And this was not the result of loical reasonin but was a direct and
mysterious reflection.




CHAPTER XI

Two months previously when Pierre was already stayin with the Rostovs
he had received a letter from Prince Theodore, askin him to come to
Petersbur to confer on some important questions that were bein
discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principal
founders.

On readin that letter (she always read her husband's letters) Natasha
herself suested that he should o to Petersbur, thouh she would feel
his absence very acutely. She attributed immense importance to all her
husband's intellectual and abstract interests thouh she did not
understand them, and she always dreaded bein a hindrance to him in such
matters. To Pierre's timid look of inquiry after readin the letter she
replied by askin him to o, but to fix a definite date for his return.
He was iven four weeks' leave of absence.

Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortniht
before, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm, depression, and
irritability.

Denisov, now a eneral on the retired list and much dissatisfied with
the present state of affairs, had arrived durin that fortniht. He
looked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of a
person once dear. A dull, dejected look, random replies, and talk about
the nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress.

Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,
her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts to console her
tried to excuse Pierre and suested reasons for his delay in returnin.

"It's all nonsense, all rubbish--those discussions which lead to nothin
and all those idiotic societies!" Natasha declared of the very affairs
in the immense importance of which she firmly believed.

And she would o to the nursery to nurse Petya, her only boy. No one
else could tell her anythin so comfortin or so reasonable as this
little three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she was
conscious of the movement of his lips and the snufflin of his little
nose. That creature said: "You are anry, you are jealous, you would
like to pay him out, you are afraid--but here am I! And I am he..." and
that was unanswerable. It was more than true.

Durin that fortniht of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby for
comfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him and
he fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was just
what she needed. While attendin to him she bore the anxiety about her
husband more easily.

She was nursin her boy when the sound of Pierre's sleih was heard at
the front door, and the old nurse--knowin how to please her mistress--
entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beamin face.

"Has he come?" Natasha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lest
she should rouse the dozin baby.

"He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.

The blood rushed to Natasha's face and her feet involuntarily moved, but
she could not jump up and run out. The baby aain opened his eyes and
looked at her. "You're here?" he seemed to be sayin, and aain lazily
smacked his lips.

Cautiously withdrawin her breast, Natasha rocked him a little, handed
him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at the
door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for havin in her
joy left the child too soon, and she lanced round. The nurse with
raised elbows was liftin the infant over the rail of his cot.

"o, ma'am! Don't worry, o!" she whispered, smilin, with the kind of
familiarity that rows up between a nurse and her mistress.

Natasha ran with liht footsteps to the anteroom.

Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancin room with his
pipe, now for the first time reconized the old Natasha. A flood of
brilliant, joyful liht poured from her transfiured face.

"He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that he too
was delihted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.

On reachin the vestibule Natasha saw a tall fiure in a fur coat
unwindin his scarf. "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" she said to
herself, and rushin at him embraced him, pressed his head to her
breast, and then pushed him back and azed at his ruddy, happy face,
covered with hoarfrost. "Yes, it is he, happy and contented..."

Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she had
experienced for the last fortniht, and the joy that had lit up her face
vanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent of
reproaches and anry words.

"Yes, it's all very well for you. You are pleased, you've had a ood
time.... But what about me? You miht at least have shown consideration
for the children. I am nursin and my milk was spoiled.... Petya was at
death's door. But you were enjoyin yourself. Yes, enjoyin..."

Pierre knew he was not to blame, for he could not have come sooner; he
knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;
above all he knew that he himself was briht and happy. He wanted to
smile but dared not even think of doin so. He made a piteous,
frihtened face and bent down.

"I could not, on my honor. But how is Petya?"

"All riht now. Come alon! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only you
could see what I was like without you, how I suffered!"

"You are well?"

"Come, come!" she said, not lettin o of his arm. And they went to
their rooms.

When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nursery
holdin his baby son, who was aain awake, on his hue riht palm and
dandlin him. A blissful briht smile was fixed on the baby's broad face
with its toothless open mouth. The storm was lon since over and there
was briht, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as she azed tenderly at
her husband and child.

"And have you talked everythin well over with Prince Theodore?" she
asked.

"Yes, capitally."

"You see, he holds it up." (She meant the baby's head.) "But how he did
frihten me... You've seen the princess? Is it true she's in love with
that..."

"Yes, just fancy..."

At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with the baby
on his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries. But in
spite of much that was interestin and had to be discussed, the baby
with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all his
attention.

"How sweet!" said Countess Mary, lookin at and playin with the baby.
"Now, Nicholas," she added, turnin to her husband, "I can't understand
how it is you don't see the charm of these delicious marvels."

"I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, lookin coldly at the baby. "A
lump of flesh. Come alon, Pierre!"

"And yet he's such an affectionate father," said Countess Mary,
vindicatin her husband, "but only after they are a year old or so..."

"Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly," said Natasha. "He says his hand is
just made for a baby's seat. Just look!"

"Only not for this..." Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a lauh, and
shiftin the baby he ave him to the nurse.




CHAPTER XII

As in every lare household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectly
distinct worlds which mered into one harmonious whole, thouh each
retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others. Every
event, joyful or sad, that took place in that house was important to all
these worlds, but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or rieve
over that occurrence independently of the others.

For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event and they
all felt it to be so.

The servants--the most reliable judes of their masters because they
jude not by their conversation or expressions of feelin but by their
acts and way of life--were lad of Pierre's return because they knew
that when he was there Count Nicholas would cease oin every day to
attend to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, and
also because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.

The children and their overnesses were lad of Pierre's return because
no one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.
He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his only piece) to
which, as he said, all possible dances could be danced, and they felt
sure he had brouht presents for them all.

Youn Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intellient,
with curly liht-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delihted because
Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous and
passionate affection. No one had instilled into him this love for Pierre
whom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who had brouht him up had
done her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him, and
little Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved him with just a shade of
contempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He did not want to be an hussar or
a Kniht of St. eore like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,
wise, and kind like Pierre. In Pierre's presence his face always shone
with pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke to
him. He did not miss a sinle word he uttered, and would afterwards,
with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meanin of
everythin Pierre had said. Pierre's past life and his unhappiness prior
to 1812 (of which youn Nicholas had formed a vaue poetic picture from
some words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,
Platon Karataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natasha
(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre's
friendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember--all this
made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.

From broken remarks about Natasha and his father, from the emotion with
which Pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful, reverent
tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him, the boy, who was only just
beinnin to uess what love is, derived the notion that his father had
loved Natasha and when dyin had left her to his friend. But the father
whom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could not
be pictured, and of whom he never thouht without a swellin heart and
tears of sadness and rapture. So the boy also was happy that Pierre had
arrived.

The uests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and unite
any company he was in.

The rown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, were
pleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothly
and peacefully.

The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brouht them, and
especially that Natasha would now be herself aain.

Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and made
haste to satisfy all their expectations.

Thouh the most absent-minded and foretful of men, Pierre, with the aid
of a list his wife drew up, had now bouht everythin, not forettin
his mother--and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dress material for
a present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews. In the early days
of his marriae it had seemed strane to him that his wife should expect
him not to foret to procure all the thins he undertook to buy, and he
had been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip he
forot everythin. But in time he rew used to this demand. Knowin that
Natasha asked nothin for herself, and ave him commissions for others
only when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found an
unexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for
everyone in the house, and never forot anythin. If he now incurred
Natasha's censure it was only for buyin too many and too expensive
thins. To her other defects (as most people thouht them, but which to
Pierre were qualities) of untidiness and nelect of herself, she now
added stininess.

From the time that Pierre bean life as a family man on a footin
entailin heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that he
spent only half as much as before, and that his affairs--which had been
in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts--had
beun to improve.

Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensive
luxury, the kind of life that can be chaned at any moment, was no
loner his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had now
been settled once for all till death and that to chane it was not in
his power, and so that way of life proved economical.

With a merry, smilin face Pierre was sortin his purchases.

"What do you think of this?" said he, unrollin a piece of stuff like a
shopman.

Natasha, who was sittin opposite to him with her eldest dauhter on her
lap, turned her sparklin eyes swiftly from her husband to the thins he
showed her.

"That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of the material.
"It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?"

Pierre told her the price.

"Too dear!" Natasha remarked. "How pleased the children will be and
Mamma too! Only you need not have bouht me this," she added, unable to
suppress a smile as she azed admirinly at a old comb set with pearls,
of a kind then just comin into fashion.

"Adele tempted me: she kept on tellin me to buy it," returned Pierre.

"When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair. "When
I take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable aain
by then. Well, let's o now."

And collectin the presents they went first to the nursery and then to
the old countess' rooms.

The countess was sittin with her companion Belova, playin rand-
patience as usual, when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawin room
with parcels under their arms.

The countess was now over sixty, was quite ray, and wore a cap with a
frill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upper lip
had sunk in, and her eyes were dim.

After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, she
felt herself a bein accidentally forotten in this world and left
without aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, or kept
awake, but did not live. Life ave her no new impressions. She wanted
nothin from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only death
could ive her. But until death came she had to o on livin, that is,
to use her vital forces. A peculiarity one sees in very youn children
and very old people was particularly evident in her. Her life had no
external aims--only a need to exercise her various functions and
inclinations was apparent. She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,
work, ive vent to her aner, and so on, merely because she had a
stomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and a liver. She did these thins not
under any external impulse as people in the full vior of life do, when
behind the purpose for which they strive that of exercisin their
functions remains unnoticed. She talked only because she physically
needed to exercise her tonue and luns. She cried as a child does,
because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. What for people in their
full vior is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.

Thus in the mornin--especially if she had eaten anythin rich the day
before--she felt a need of bein anry and would choose as the handiest
pretext Belova's deafness.

She would bein to say somethin to her in a low tone from the other end
of the room.

"It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.

And when Belova replied: "Oh yes, they've come," she would mutter
anrily: "O Lord! How stupid and deaf she is!"

Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry or too damp
or not rubbed fine enouh. After these fits of irritability her face
would row yellow, and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belova
would aain be deaf, the snuff damp, and the countess' face yellow. Just
as she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exercise
her still-existin faculty of thinkin--and the pretext for that was a
ame of patience. When she needed to cry, the deceased count would be
the pretext. When she wanted to be aitated, Nicholas and his health
would be the pretext, and when she felt a need to speak spitefully, the
pretext would be Countess Mary. When her vocal orans needed exercise,
which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner
rest in a darkened room, the pretext would be the retellin of the same
stories over and over aain to the same audience.

The old lady's condition was understood by the whole household thouh no
one ever spoke of it, and they all made every possible effort to satisfy
her needs. Only by a rare lance exchaned with a sad smile between
Nicholas, Pierre, Natasha, and Countess Mary was the common
understandin of her condition expressed.

But those lances expressed somethin more: they said that she had
played her part in life, that what they now saw was not her whole self,
that we must all become like her, and that they were lad to yield to
her, to restrain themselves for this once precious bein formerly as
full of life as themselves, but now so much to be pitied. "Memento
mori," said these lances.

Only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, and the
little children failed to understand this and avoided her.




CHAPTER XIII

When Pierre and his wife entered the drawin room the countess was in
one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion of
playin patience, and so--thouh by force of habit she reeted him with
the words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after an
absence: "Hih time, my dear, hih time! We were all weary of waitin
for you. Well, thank od!" and received her presents with another
customary remark: "It's not the ift that's precious, my dear, but that
you ive it to me, an old woman..."--yet it was evident that she was not
pleased by Pierre's arrival at that moment when it diverted her
attention from the unfinished ame.

She finished her ame of patience and only then examined the presents.
They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a briht-
blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with a lid,
and a old snuffbox with the count's portrait on the lid which Pierre
had had done by a miniaturist in Petersbur. The countess had lon
wished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then she
lanced indifferently at the portrait and ave her attention chiefly to
the box for cards.

"Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she always
did. "But best of all you have brouht yourself back--for I never saw
anythin like it, you ouht to ive your wife a scoldin! What are we to
do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn't see
anythin, doesn't remember anythin," she went on, repeatin her usual
phrases. "Look, Anna Timofeevna," she added to her companion, "see what
a box for cards my son has brouht us!"

Belova admired the presents and was delihted with her dress material.

Thouh Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov had much to
talk about that they could not discuss before the old countess--not that
anythin was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so far
behindhand in many thins that had they beun to converse in her
presence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and to
repeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so was
dead and so-and-so was married, which she would aain be unable to
remember--yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawin room from
habit, and Pierre answered the countess' questions as to whether Prince
Vasili had aed and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent reetins
and still thouht of them, and other matters that interested no one and
to which she herself was indifferent.

Conversation of this kind, interestin to no one yet unavoidable,
continued all throuh teatime. All the rown-up members of the family
were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided beside
the samovar. The children with their tutors and overnesses had had tea
and their voices were audible from the next room. At tea all sat in
their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small table
where his tea was handed to him; Milka, the old ray borzoi bitch
(dauhter of the first Milka), with a quite ray face and lare black
eyes that seemed more prominent than ever, lay on the armchair beside
him; Denisov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskers had turned half
ray, sat beside countess Mary with his eneral's tunic unbuttoned;
Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what he
knew miht interest the old lady and that she could understand. He told
her of external social events and of the people who had formed the
circle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, livin, and
distinct roup, but who were now for the most part scattered about the
world and like herself were arnerin the last ears of the harvests they
had sown in earlier years. But to the old countess those contemporaries
of hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. Natasha saw by
Pierre's animation that his visit had been interestin and that he had
much to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess. Denisov,
not bein a member of the family, did not understand Pierre's caution
and bein, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurrin in
Petersbur, kept urin Pierre to tell them about what had happened in
the Semenovsk reiment, then about Arakcheev, and then about the Bible
Society. Once or twice Pierre was carried away and bean to speak of
these thins, but Nicholas and Natasha always brouht him back to the
health of Prince Ivan and Countess Mary Alexeevna.

"Well, and all this idiocy--ossner and Tatawinova?" Denisov asked. "Is
that weally still oin on?"


"oin on?" Pierre exclaimed. "Why more than ever! The Bible Society is
the whole overnment now!"

"What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who had finished her
tea and evidently needed a pretext for bein anry after her meal. "What
are you sayin about the overnment? I don't understand."

"Well, you know, Maman," Nicholas interposed, knowin how to translate
thins into his mother's lanuae, "Prince Alexander olitsyn has
founded a society and in consequence has reat influence, they say."

"Arakcheev and olitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now the
whole overnment! And what a overnment! They see treason everywhere and
are afraid of everythin."

"Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable man.
I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna's," said the countess in an
offended tone; and still more offended that they all remained silent,
she went on: "Nowadays everyone finds fault. A ospel Society! Well, and
what harm is there in that?" and she rose (everybody else ot up too)
and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sittin
room.

The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of the
children's voices and lauhter from the next room. Evidently some jolly
excitement was oin on there.

"Finished, finished!" little Natasha's leeful yell rose above them all.

Pierre exchaned lances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natasha he
never lost siht of) and smiled happily.

"That's delihtful music!" said he.

"It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stockin," said Countess
Mary.

"Oh, I'll o and see," said Pierre, jumpin up. "You know," he added,
stoppin at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music? It is
always the first thin that tells me all is well. When I was drivin
here today, the nearer I ot to the house the more anxious I rew. As I
entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of lauhter and that meant
that all was well."

"I know! I know that feelin," said Nicholas. "But I mustn't o there--
those stockins are to be a surprise for me."

Pierre went to the children, and the shoutin and lauhter rew still
louder.

"Come, Anna Makarovna," Pierre's voice was heard sayin, "come here into
the middle of the room and at the word of command, 'One, two,' and when
I say 'three'... You stand here, and you in my arms--well now! One,
two!..." said Pierre, and a silence followed: "three!" and a rapturously
breathless cry of children's voices filled the room. "Two, two!" they
shouted.

This meant two stockins, which by a secret process known only to
herself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the same
needles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantly drew,
one out of the other, in the children's presence.




CHAPTER XIV

Soon after this the children came in to say ood niht. They kissed
everyone, the tutors and overnesses made their bows, and they went out.
Only youn Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalles whispered to the
boy to come downstairs.

"No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay," replied
Nicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper.

"Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, oin up to his aunt.

His face expressed entreaty, aitation, and ecstasy. Countess Mary
lanced at him and turned to Pierre.

"When you are here he can't tear himself away," she said.

"I will brin him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. ood niht!" said
Pierre, ivin his hand to the Swiss tutor, and he turned to youn
Nicholas with a smile. "You and I haven't seen anythin of one another
yet... How like he is rowin, Mary!" he added, addressin Countess
Mary.

"Like my father?" asked the boy, flushin crimson and lookin up at
Pierre with briht, ecstatic eyes.

Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been sayin when the
children had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doin woolwork; Natasha
did not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denisov rose, asked
for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sonya--who sat
weary but resolute at the samovar--and questioned Pierre. The curly-
headed, delicate boy sat with shinin eyes unnoticed in a corner,
startin every now and then and mutterin somethin to himself, and
evidently experiencin a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curly
head, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward the
place where Pierre sat.

The conversation turned on the contemporary ossip about those in power,
in which most people see the chief interest of home politics. Denisov,
dissatisfied with the overnment on account of his own disappointments
in the service, heard with pleasure of the thins done in Petersbur
which seemed to him stupid, and made forcible and sharp comments on what
Pierre told them.

"One used to have to be a erman--now one must dance with Tatawinova and
Madame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, they
should let that fine fellow Bonaparte loose--he'd knock all this
nonsense out of them! Fancy ivin the command of the Semenov weiment
to a fellow like that Schwa'tz!" he cried.

Nicholas, thouh free from Denisov's readiness to find fault with
everythin, also thouht that discussion of the overnment was a very
serious and weihty matter, and the fact that A had been appointed
Minister of This and B overnor eneral of That, and that the Emperor
had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him very
important. And so he thouht it necessary to take an interest in these
thins and to question Pierre. The questions put by these two kept the
conversation from chanin its ordinary character of ossip about the
hiher overnment circles.

But Natasha, knowin all her husband's ways and ideas, saw that he had
lon been wishin but had been unable to divert the conversation to
another channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sake of
which he had one to Petersbur to consult with his new friend Prince
Theodore, and she helped him by askin how his affairs with Prince
Theodore had one.

"What was it about?" asked Nicholas.

"Always the same thin," said Pierre, lookin round at his listeners.
"Everybody sees that thins are oin so badly that they cannot be
allowed to o on so and that it is the duty of all decent men to
counteract it as far as they can."

"What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frownin slihtly. "What
can be done?"

"Why, this..."

"Come into my study," said Nicholas.

Natasha, who had lon expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, now
heard the nurse callin her and went to the nursery. Countess Mary
followed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholas Bolkonski
followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writin table
in a shady corner by the window.

"Well, what would you do?" asked Denisov.

"Always some fantastic schemes," said Nicholas.

"Why this," bean Pierre, not sittin down but pacin the room,
sometimes stoppin short, esticulatin, and lispin: "the position in
Petersbur is this: the Emperor does not look into anythin. He has
abandoned himself altoether to this mysticism" (Pierre could not
tolerate mysticism in anyone now). "He seeks only for peace, and only
these people sans foi ni loi * can ive it him--people who recklessly
hack at and stranle everythin--Manitski, Arakcheev, and tutti
quanti.... You will aree that if you did not look after your estates
yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was the
more readily your object miht be attained," he said to Nicholas.


* Without faith or law.

"Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas.

"Well, everythin is oin to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in the
army nothin but floin, drillin, and Military Settlements; the
people are tortured, enlihtenment is suppressed. All that is youn and
honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot o on. Everythin is
strained to such a deree that it will certainly break," said Pierre (as
those who examine the actions of any overnment have always said since
overnments bean). "I told them just one thin in Petersbur."

"Told whom?"

"Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meanin lance from under his
brows. "Prince Theodore and all those. To encourae culture and
philanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but in the
present circumstances somethin else is needed."

At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His face
darkened and he went up to the boy.

"Why are you here?"

"Why? Let him be," said Pierre, takin Nicholas by the arm and
continuin. "That is not enouh, I told them. Somethin else is needed.
When you stand expectin the overstrained strin to snap at any moment,
when everyone is expectin the inevitable catastrophe, as many as
possible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the eneral
calamity. Everythin that is youn and stron is bein enticed away and
depraved. One is lured by women, another by honors, a third by ambition
or money, and they o over to that camp. No independent men, such as you
or I, are left. What I say is widen the scope of our society, let the
mot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!"

Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up an armchair, sat
down in it, and listened to Pierre, couhin discontentedly and frownin
more and more.

"But action with what aim?" he cried. "And what position will you adopt
toward the overnment?"

"Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secret if the
overnment allows it. Not merely is it not hostile to overnment, but it
is a society of true conservatives--a society of entlemen in the full
meanin of that word. It is only to prevent some Puachev or other from
killin my children and yours, and Arakcheev from sendin me off to some
Military Settlement. We join hands only for the public welfare and the
eneral safety."

"Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful one
which can only cause harm."

"Why? Did the Tuendbund which saved Europe" (they did not then venture
to suest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? The Tuendbund is
an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christ
preached on the Cross."

Natasha, who had come in durin the conversation, looked joyfully at her
husband. It was not what he was sayin that pleased her--that did not
even interest her, for it seemed to her that was all extremely simple
and that she had known it a lon time (it seemed so to her because she
knew that it spran from Pierre's whole soul), but it was his animated
and enthusiastic appearance that made her lad.

The boy with the thin neck stretchin out from the turn-down collar--
whom everyone had forotten--azed at Pierre with even reater and more
rapturous joy. Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart, and with a
nervous movement of his finers he unconsciously broke the sealin wax
and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle's table.

"It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the erman
Tuendbund was, and what I am proposin."

"No, my fwiend! The Tuendbund is all vewy well for the sausae eaters,
but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it," interposed
Denisov in a loud and resolute voice. "I awee that evewythin here is
wotten and howwible, but the Tuendbund I don't understand. If we're not
satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. That's all wiht. Je suis
vot'e homme!" *


* "I'm your man."

Pierre smiled, Natasha bean to lauh, but Nicholas knitted his brows
still more and bean provin to Pierre that there was no prospect of any
reat chane and that all the daner he spoke of existed only in his
imaination. Pierre maintained the contrary, and as his mental faculties
were reater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. This
made him still anrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasonin but
by somethin within him stroner than reason, of the justice of his
opinion.

"I will tell you this," he said, risin and tryin with nervously
twitchin finers to prop up his pipe in a corner, but finally
abandonin the attempt. "I can't prove it to you. You say that
everythin here is rotten and that an overthrow is comin: I don't see
it. But you also say that our oath of alleiance is a conditional
matter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know, but
if you formed a secret society and bean workin aainst the overnment-
-be it what it may--I know it is my duty to obey the overnment. And if
Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron aainst you and cut you down, I
should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.' And you may arue
about that as you like!"

An awkward silence followed these words. Natasha was the first to speak,
defendin her husband and attackin her brother. Her defense was weak
and inapt but she attained her object. The conversation was resumed, and
no loner in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas' last remark.

When they all ot up to o in to supper, little Nicholas Bolkonski went
up to Pierre, pale and with shinin, radiant eyes.

"Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he aree with
you?" he asked.

And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, and
powerful process of thouht and feelin must have been oin on in this
boy durin that conversation, and rememberin all he had said he
reretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, to ive
him an answer.

"Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.

The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what he
had done to the thins on the table. He flushed and went up to Nicholas.

"Uncle, forive me, I did that... unintentionally," he said, pointin to
the broken sealin wax and pens.

Nicholas started anrily.

"All riht, all riht," he said, throwin the bits under the table.

And evidently suppressin his vexation with difficulty, he turned away
from the boy.

"You ouht not to have been here at all," he said.




CHAPTER XV

The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies, but
turned on the subject Nicholas liked best--recollections of 1812.
Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly areeable and amusin
about them. The family separated on the most friendly terms.

After supper Nicholas, havin undressed in his study and iven
instructions to the steward who had been waitin for him, went to the
bedroom in his dressin own, where he found his wife still at her
table, writin.

"What are you writin, Mary?" Nicholas asked.

Countess Mary blushed. She was afraid that what she was writin would
not be understood or approved by her husband.

She had wanted to conceal what she was writin from him, but at the same
time was lad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have to
tell him.

"A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handin him a blue exercise book
filled with her firm, bold writin.

"A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up the
book.

It was in French.

December 4. Today when Andrusha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not wish
to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He was nauhty and
obstinate. I tried threats, but he only rew anrier. Then I took the
matter in hand: I left him alone and bean with nurse's help to et the
other children up, tellin him that I did not love him. For a lon time
he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me in
his shirt, and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a lon time. It
was plain that what troubled him most was that he had rieved me.
Afterwards in the evenin when I ave him his ticket, he aain bean
cryin piteously and kissin me. One can do anythin with him by
tenderness.

"What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired.

"I have beun ivin the elder ones marks every evenin, showin how
they have behaved."

Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were azin at him, and
continued to turn over the paes and read. In the diary was set down
everythin in the children's lives that seemed noteworthy to their
mother as showin their characters or suestin eneral reflections on
educational methods. They were for the most part quite insinificant
trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, now
that he read this diary about his children for the first time.

Under the date "5" was entered:

Mitya was nauhty at table. Papa said he was to have no puddin. He had
none, but looked so unhappily and reedily at the others while they were
eatin! I think that punishment by deprivin children of sweets only
develops their reediness. Must tell Nicholas this.

Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiant eyes
azed at him questioninly: would he approve or disapprove of her diary?
There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of his
admiration for his wife.

Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thouht Nicholas, or even
done at all, but this untirin, continual spiritual effort of which the
sole aim was the children's moral welfare delihted him. Had Nicholas
been able to analyze his feelins he would have found that his steady,
tender, and proud love of his wife rested on his feelin of wonder at
her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,
in which she had her bein.

He was proud of her intellience and oodness, reconized his own
insinificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all the
more that she with such a soul not only beloned to him but was part of
himself.

"I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a sinificant look,
and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today. You
weren't in the study. We bean disputin--Pierre and I--and I lost my
temper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don't know what would
become of him if Natasha didn't keep him in hand.... Have you any idea
why he went to Petersbur? They have formed..."

"Yes, I know," said Countess Mary. "Natasha told me."

"Well, then, you know," Nicholas went on, rowin hot at the mere
recollection of their discussion, "he wanted to convince me that it is
every honest man's duty to o aainst the overnment, and that the oath
of alleiance and duty... I am sorry you weren't there. They all fell on
me--Denisov and Natasha... Natasha is absurd. How she rules over him!
And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her own
but only repeats his sayins..." added Nicholas, yieldin to that
irresistible inclination which tempts us to jude those nearest and
dearest to us. He forot that what he was sayin about Natasha could
have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife.

"Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary.

"When I told him that duty and the oath were above everythin, he
started provin oodness knows what! A pity you were not there--what
would you have said?"

"As I see it you were quite riht, and I told Natasha so. Pierre says
everybody is sufferin, tortured, and bein corrupted, and that it is
our duty to help our neihbor. Of course he is riht there," said
Countess Mary, "but he forets that we have other duties nearer to us,
duties indicated to us by od Himself, and that thouh we miht expose
ourselves to risks we must not risk our children."

"Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas, who
fancied he really had said it. "But they insisted on their own view:
love of one's neihbor and Christianity--and all this in the presence of
youn Nicholas, who had one into my study and broke all my thins."

"Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,"
said Countess Mary. "He is such an exceptional boy. I am afraid I
nelect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations while
he has no one. He is constantly alone with his thouhts."

"Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account. All that
the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doin for
him, and of course I am lad of it. He is a fine lad, a fine lad! This
evenin he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy--as we were
oin in to supper I looked and he had broken everythin on my table to
bits, and he told me of it himself at once! I never knew him to tell an
untruth. A fine lad, a fine lad!" repeated Nicholas, who at heart was
not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to reconize that
he was a fine lad.

"Still, I am not the same as his own mother," said Countess Mary. "I
feel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I am
dreadfully afraid for him. It would be ood for him to have companions."

"Well it won't be for lon. Next summer I'll take him to Petersbur,"
said Nicholas. "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be," he
continued, returnin to the talk in the study which had evidently
disturbed him. "Well, what business is it of mine what oes on there--
whether Arakcheev is bad, and all that? What business was it of mine
when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with
prison, and had a mother who could not see or understand it? And then
there are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my own
pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from mornin to niht?
No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not
to leave the children such bears as I was."

Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone
and that he attached too much importance to these matters. But she knew
she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so. She only
took his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sin of approval and a
confirmation of his thouhts, and after a few minutes' reflection
continued to think aloud.

"You know, Mary, today Elias Mitrofanych" (this was his overseer) "came
back from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offerin eihty
thousand rubles for the forest."

And with an eaer face Nicholas bean to speak of the possibility of
repurchasin Otradnoe before lon, and added: "Another ten years of life
and I shall leave the children... in an excellent position."

Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told
her. She knew that when he thouht aloud in this way he would sometimes
ask her what he had been sayin, and be vexed if he noticed that she had
been thinkin about somethin else. But she had to force herself to
attend, for what he was sayin did not interest her at all. She looked
at him and did not think, but felt, about somethin different. She felt
a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all
that she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him still
stroner and added a touch of passionate tenderness. Besides this
feelin which absorbed her altoether and hindered her from followin
the details of her husband's plans, thouhts that had no connection with
what he was sayin flitted throuh her mind. She thouht of her nephew.
Her husband's account of the boy's aitation while Pierre was speakin
struck her forcibly, and various traits of his entle, sensitive
character recurred to her mind; and while thinkin of her nephew she
thouht also of her own children. She did not compare them with him, but
compared her feelin for them with her feelin for him, and felt with
reret that there was somethin lackin in her feelin for youn
Nicholas.

Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the
difference in their aes, but she felt herself to blame toward him and
promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible--in
this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and all
her neihbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary's soul always
strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and could
therefore never be at peace. A stern expression of the lofty, secret
sufferin of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face. Nicholas
azed at her. "O od! What will become of us if she dies, as I always
fear when her face is like that?" thouht he, and placin himself before
the icon he bean to say his evenin prayers.




CHAPTER XVI

Natasha and Pierre, left alone, also bean to talk as only a husband and
wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,
understandin and expressin each other's thouhts in ways contrary to
all rules of loic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and in
a quite peculiar way. Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her
husband that for her it was the surest sin of somethin bein wron
between them if Pierre followed a line of loical reasonin. When he
bean provin anythin, or talkin arumentatively and calmly and she,
led on by his example, bean to do the same, she knew that they were on
the vere of a quarrel.

From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with wide-
open happy eyes, and quickly seizin his head pressed it to her bosom,
sayin: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"--from that
moment this conversation bean, contrary to all the laws of loic and
contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at
one and the same time. This simultaneous discussion of many topics did
not prevent a clear understandin but on the contrary was the surest
sin that they fully understood one another.

Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasonin, and
contradictory, except the feelin that uides the dream, so in this
intercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves were
not consecutive and clear but only the feelin that prompted them.

Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doins, of how she
had suffered and lacked life durin his own absence, and of how she was
fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better than
herself. In sayin this Natasha was sincere in acknowledin Mary's
superiority, but at the same time by sayin it she made a demand on
Pierre that he should, all the same, prefer her to Mary and to all other
women, and that now, especially after havin seen many women in
Petersbur, he should tell her so afresh.

Pierre, answerin Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it had been
for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersbur.

"I have quite lost the knack of talkin to ladies," he said. "It was
simply dull. Besides, I was very busy."

Natasha looked intently at him and went on:

"Mary is so splendid," she said. "How she understands children! It is as
if she saw straiht into their souls. Yesterday, for instance, Mitya was
nauhty..."

"How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.

Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya's likeness to Nicholas: the
recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and
he wanted to know what Natasha thouht of it.

"Nicholas has the weakness of never areein with anythin not enerally
accepted. But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line,"
said she, repeatin words Pierre had once uttered.

"No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are an
amusement--almost a pastime," said Pierre. "For instance, he is
collectin a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book till
he has read what he had already bouht--Sismondi and Rousseau and
Montesquieu," he added with a smile. "You know how much I..." he bean
to soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to show
that this was unnecessary.

"So you say ideas are an amusement to him...."

"Yes, and for me nothin else is serious. All the time in Petersbur I
saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thouht, all else is
mere amusement."

"Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," said
Natasha. "Which was most delihted? Lisa, I'm sure."

"Yes," Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind. "Nicholas
says we ouht not to think. But I can't help it. Besides, when I was in
Petersbur I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would o
to pieces without me--everyone was pullin his own way. But I succeeded
in unitin them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple. You see, I
don't say that we ouht to oppose this and that. We may be mistaken.
What I say is: 'Join hands, you who love the riht, and let there be but
one banner--that of active virtue.' Prince Serey is a fine fellow and
clever."

Natasha would have had no doubt as to the reatness of Pierre's idea,
but one thin disconcerted her. "Can a man so important and necessary to
society be also my husband? How did this happen?" She wished to express
this doubt to him. "Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer
than all the others?" she asked herself, and passed in review all those
whom Pierre most respected. Judin by what he had said there was no one
he had respected so hihly as Platon Karataev.

"Do you know what I am thinkin about?" she asked. "About Platon
Karataev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"

Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understood his
wife's line of thouht.

"Platon Karataev?" he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerely tryin
to imaine Karataev's opinion on the subject. "He would not have
understood... yet perhaps he would."

"I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said. "Awfully, awfully!"

"No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection. "What
he would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxious
to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everythin, and I should
have been proud to let him see us. There now--you talk of my absence,
but you wouldn't believe what a special feelin I have for you after a
separation...."

"Yes, I should think..." Natasha bean.

"No, it's not that. I never leave off lovin you. And one couldn't love
more, but this is somethin special.... Yes, of course-" he did not
finish because their eyes meetin said the rest.

"What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "about honeymoons,
and that the reatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is the
best of all. If only you did not o away! Do you remember how we
quarreled? And it was always my fault. Always mine. And what we
quarreled about--I don't even remember!"

"Always about the same thin," said Pierre with a smile. "Jealo..."

"Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyes littered
coldly and vindictively. "Did you see her?" she added, after a pause.

"No, and if I had I shouldn't have reconized her."

They were silent for a while.

"Oh, do you know? While you were talkin in the study I was lookin at
you," Natasha bean, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that had
come over them. "You are as like him as two peas--like the boy." (She
meant her little son.) "Oh, it's time to o to him.... The milk's
come.... But I'm sorry to leave you."

They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turnin to one another
at the same time they both bean to speak. Pierre bean with self-
satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natasha with a quiet, happy smile. Havin
interrupted one another they both stopped to let the other continue.

"No. What did you say? o on, o on."

"No, you o on, I was talkin nonsense," said Natasha.

Pierre finished what he had beun. It was the sequel to his complacent
reflections on his success in Petersbur. At that moment it seemed to
him that he was chosen to ive a new direction to the whole of Russian
society and to the whole world.

"I only wished to say that ideas that have reat results are always
simple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are united and
constitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Now that's simple
enouh."

"Yes."

"And what were you oin to say?"

"I? Only nonsense."

"But all the same?"

"Oh nothin, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilinly still more
brihtly. "I only wanted to tell you about Petya: today nurse was comin
to take him from me, and he lauhed, shut his eyes, and clun to me. I'm
sure he thouht he was hidin. Awfully sweet! There, now he's cryin.
Well, ood-by!" and she left the room.

Meanwhile downstairs in youn Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lamp
was burnin as usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could not
cure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and his
Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snorin. Little Nicholas, who had
just waked up in a cold perspiration, sat up in bed and azed before him
with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamed
that he and Uncle Pierre, wearin helmets such as were depicted in his
Plutarch, were leadin a hue army. The army was made up of white
slantin lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about in
autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Viere. In front was
lory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and
Pierre were borne alon lihtly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their
oal. Suddenly the threads that moved them bean to slacken and become
entanled and it rew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before
them in a stern and threatenin attitude.

"Have you done this?" he said, pointin to some broken sealin wax and
pens. "I loved you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill the
first of you who moves forward." Little Nicholas turned to look at
Pierre but Pierre was no loner there. In his place was his father--
Prince Andrew--and his father had neither shape nor form, but he
existed, and when little Nicholas perceived him he rew faint with love:
he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless. His father caressed and
pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terror
seized youn Nicholas and he awoke.

"My father!" he thouht. (Thouh there were two ood portraits of Prince
Andrew in the house, Nicholas never imained him in human form.) "My
father has been with me and caressed me. He approved of me and of Uncle
Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it. Mucius Scaevola burned
his hand. Why should not the same sort of thin happen to me? I know
they want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall have
finished learnin, and then I will do somethin. I only pray od that
somethin may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch's men, and I
will act as they did. I will do better. Everyone shall know me, love me,
and be delihted with me!" And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and
he bean to cry.

"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice askin.

"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.

"He is ood and kind and I am fond of him!" he thouht of Dessalles.
"But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh,
Father, Father! Yes, I will do somethin with which even he would be
satisfied...."

SECOND EPILOUE




CHAPTER I

History is the life of nations and of humanity. To seize and put into
words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a sinle
nation, appears impossible.

The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe
and seize the apparently elusive--the life of a people. They described
the activity of individuals who ruled the people, and rearded the
activity of those men as representin the activity of the whole nation.

The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by
what was the will of these individuals themselves uided? the ancients
met by reconizin a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of
a chosen man, and uided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish
ends that were predestined.

For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct
participation of the Deity in human affairs.

Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.

It would seem that havin rejected the belief of the ancients in man's
subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations
are led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power but
the causes that produce it. But modern history has not done this. Havin
in theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows them
in practice.

Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly uided by the
will of od, modern history has iven us either heroes endowed with
extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very various
kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. Instead of the
former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, reek, or Roman nations,
which ancient historians rearded as representin the proress of
humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims--the welfare of the
French, erman, or Enlish people, or, in its hihest abstraction, the
welfare and civilization of humanity in eneral, by which is usually
meant that of the peoples occupyin a small northwesterly portion of a
lare continent.

Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without
replacin them by a new conception, and the loic of the situation has
oblied the historians, after they had apparently rejected the divine
authority of the kins and the "fate" of the ancients, to reach the same
conclusion by another road, that is, to reconize (1) nations uided by
individual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim to which these
nations and humanity at lare are tendin.

At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from ibbon to
Buckle, despite their seemin disareements and the apparent novelty of
their outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.

In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals
who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers only
monarchs, enerals, and ministers as bein such men, while another
includes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).
Secondly, it is assumed that the oal toward which humanity is bein led
is known to the historians: to one of them this oal is the reatness of
the Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,
and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called
Europe.

In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it rows, spreads, and is expressed
by a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times it moves
eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward. In
1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable
symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attractin to it,
as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe. The
counter movement reaches the startin point of the first movement in the
west--Paris--and subsides.

Durin that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left
untilled, houses were burned, trade chaned its direction, millions of
men mirated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions of
Christian men professin the law of love of their fellows slew one
another.

What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burn
houses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of these events?
What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and most
leitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the
monuments and tradition of that period.

For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the
science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know
themselves.

If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have
said that od, to reward or punish his people, ave Napoleon power and
directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and that reply
would have been clear and complete. One miht believe or disbelieve in
the divine sinificance of Napoleon, but for anyone believin in it
there would have been nothin unintelliible in the history of that
period, nor would there have been any contradictions.

But modern history cannot ive that reply. Science does not admit the
conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity
in human affairs, and therefore history ouht to ive other answers.

Modern history replyin to these questions says: you want to know what
this movement means, what caused it, and what force produced these
events? Then listen:

"Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and such
mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly. His
descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly. And they had
such and such favorites and such and such mistresses. Moreover, certain
men wrote some books at that time. At the end of the eihteenth century
there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who bean to talk about all
men bein free and equal. This caused people all over France to bein to
slash at and drown one another. They killed the kin and many other
people. At that time there was in France a man of enius--Napoleon. He
conquered everybody everywhere--that is, he killed many people because
he was a reat enius. And for some reason he went to kill Africans, and
killed them so well and was so cunnin and wise that when he returned to
France he ordered everybody to obey him, and they all obeyed him. Havin
become an Emperor he aain went out to kill people in Italy, Austria,
and Prussia. And there too he killed a reat many. In Russia there was
an Emperor, Alexander, who decided to restore order in Europe and
therefore fouht aainst Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends with
him, but in 1811 they aain quarreled and aain bean killin many
people. Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured
Moscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the Emperor
Alexander, helped by the advice of Stein and others, united Europe to
arm aainst the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon's allies suddenly
became his enemies and their forces advanced aainst the fresh forces he
raised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to
abdicate, and sent him to the island of Elba, not deprivin him of the
title of Emperor and showin him every respect, thouh five years before
and one year later they all rearded him as an outlaw and a briand.
Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the lauhinstock both of the
French and the Allies, bean to rein. And Napoleon, sheddin tears
before his Old uards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then
the skillful statesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, who
manaed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and thereby
extended the frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by these
conversations made the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly the
diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of
aain orderin their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon
arrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hatin
him, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were
anry at this and went to fiht the French once more. And they defeated
the enius Napoleon and, suddenly reconizin him as a briand, sent him
to the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from the beloved
France so dear to his heart, died a linerin death on that rock and
bequeathed his reat deeds to posterity. But in Europe a reaction
occurred and the sovereins once aain all bean to oppress their
subjects."

It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic--a caricature of the
historical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mild expression of the
contradictory replies, not meetin the questions, which all the
historians ive, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories of
separate states to the writers of eneral histories and the new
histories of the culture of that period.

The straneness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that
modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.

If the purpose of history be to ive a description of the movement of
humanity and of the peoples, the first question--in the absence of a
reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible--is: what is the
power that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriously replies
either that Napoleon was a reat enius, or that Louis XIV was very
proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.

All that may be so and mankind is ready to aree with it, but it is not
what was asked. All that would be interestin if we reconized a divine
power based on itself and always consistently directin its nations
throuh Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowlede such
a power, and therefore before speakin about Napoleons, Louis-es, and
authors, we ouht to be shown the connection existin between these men
and the movement of the nations.

If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, it should be
explained in what this new force consists, for the whole interest of
history lies precisely in that force.

History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to
everyone. But in spite of every desire to reard it as known, anyone
readin many historical works cannot help doubtin whether this new
force, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is really
quite well known to everybody.




CHAPTER II

What force moves the nations?

Bioraphical historians and historians of separate nations understand
this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narration
events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or in
eneral of the persons they describe. The answers iven by this kind of
historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are
satisfactory only as lon as there is but one historian to each event.
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies bein to
describe the same event, the replies they ive immediately lose all
meanin, for this force is understood by them all not only differently
but often in quite contradictory ways. One historian says that an event
was produced by Napoleon's power, another that it was produced by
Alexander's, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.
Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even in
their statement as to the force on which the authority of some
particular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon's
power was based on his virtue and enius. Lanfrey, a Republican, says it
was based on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historians
of this class, by mutually destroyin one another's positions, destroy
the understandin of the force which produces events, and furnish no
reply to history's essential question.

Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to
reconize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of the force
which produces events. They do not reconize it as a power inherent in
heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously
directed forces. In describin a war or the subjuation of a people, a
eneral historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power of
one man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with the
event.

Accordin to this view the power of historical personaes, represented
as the product of many forces, can no loner, it would seem, be rearded
as a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universal
historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself
produces events, and treat it as their cause. In their exposition, an
historic character is first the product of his time, and his power only
the resultant of various forces, and then his power is itself a force
producin events. ervinus, Schlosser, and others, for instance, at one
time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of
1789 and so forth, and at another plainly say that the campain of 1812
and other thins they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon's
misdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their
development by Napoleon's caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the
eneral temper of the ae produced Napoleon's power. But Napoleon's
power suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the eneral temper of
the ae.

This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur at
every step, but the universal historians' accounts are all made up of a
chain of such contradictions. This contradiction occurs because after
enterin the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.

To find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force, the
sum of the components must equal the resultant. This condition is never
observed by the universal historians, and so to explain the resultant
forces they are oblied to admit, in addition to the insufficient
components, another unexplained force affectin the resultant action.

Specialist historians describin the campain of 1813 or the restoration
of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by the
will of Alexander. But the universal historian ervinus, refutin this
opinion of the specialist historian, tries to prove that the campain of
1813 and the restoration of the Bourbons were due to other thins beside
Alexander's will--such as the activity of Stein, Metternich, Madame de
Stael, Talleyrand, Fichte, Chateaubriand, and others. The historian
evidently decomposes Alexander's power into the components: Talleyrand,
Chateaubriand, and the rest--but the sum of the components, that is, the
interactions of Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Stael, and the
others, evidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon of
millions of Frenchmen submittin to the Bourbons. That Chateaubriand,
Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words to one another only
affected their mutual relations but does not account for the submission
of millions. And therefore to explain how from these relations of theirs
the submission of millions of people resulted--that is, how component
forces equal to one A ave a resultant equal to a thousand times A--the
historian is aain oblied to fall back on power--the force he had
denied--and to reconize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, he
has to admit an unexplained force actin on the resultant. And that is
just what the universal historians do, and consequently they not only
contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.

Peasants havin no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, accordin to
whether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown the clouds
away," or, "The wind has brouht up the clouds." And in the same way the
universal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in with
their theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,
when they want to prove somethin else, say that power produces events.

A third class of historians--the so-called historians of culture--
followin the path laid down by the universal historians who sometimes
accept writers and ladies as forces producin events--aain take that
force to be somethin quite different. They see it in what is called
culture--in mental activity.

The historians of culture are quite consistent in reard to their
proenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historical
events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one
another in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact that
such and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number of
indications accompanyin every vital phenomenon, these historians select
the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is
the cause. But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of events
lies in intellectual activity, only by a reat stretch can one admit
that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the
movement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectual
activity controls people's actions, for that view is not confirmed by
such facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resultin
from the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars and
executions resultin from the preachin of love.

But even admittin as correct all the cunninly devised aruments with
which these histories are filled--admittin that nations are overned by
some undefined force called an idea--history's essential question still
remains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchs and to the
influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal
historians, another, newer force--the idea--is added, the connection of
which with the masses needs explanation. It is possible to understand
that Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one may
even conceive that Napoleon toether with other influences was the cause
of an event; but how a book, Le Contrat Social, had the effect of makin
Frenchmen bein to drown one another cannot be understood without an
explanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event.

Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,
and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual
activity of men and their historical movements, just as such a
connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,
handicraft, ardenin, or anythin else you please. But why intellectual
activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or
expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand. Only
the followin considerations can have led the historians to such a
conclusion: (1) that history is written by learned men, and so it is
natural and areeable for them to think that the activity of their class
supplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as a similar
belief is natural and areeable to traders, ariculturists, and soldiers
(if they do not express it, that is merely because traders and soldiers
do not write history), and (2) that spiritual activity, enlihtenment,
civilization, culture, ideas, are all indistinct, indefinite conceptions
under whose banner it is very easy to use words havin a still less
definite meanin, and which can therefore be readily introduced into any
theory.

But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind
(which may possibly even be of use to someone for somethin) the
histories of culture, to which all eneral histories tend more and more
to approximate, are sinificant from the fact that after seriously and
minutely examinin various reliious, philosophic, and political
doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe an
actual historic event such as the campain of 1812 for instance, they
involuntarily describe it as resultin from an exercise of power--and
say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will. Speakin so,
the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and show
that the new force they have devised does not account for what happens
in history, and that history can only be explained by introducin a
power which they apparently do not reconize.




CHAPTER III

A locomotive is movin. Someone asks: "What moves it?" A peasant says
the devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves because its
wheels o round. A third asserts that the cause of its movement lies in
the smoke which the wind carries away.

The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. To
refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil, or
another peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devil
but a erman, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as a result of the
contradiction, will they see that they are both wron. But the man who
says that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, for
havin once beun to analyze he ouht to o on and explain further why
the wheels o round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of the
movement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, he
has no riht to stop in his search for the cause. The man who explains
the movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back has
noticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken the
first sin that occurs to him and in his turn has offered that as an
explanation.

The only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive is
that of a force commensurate with the movement observed.

The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is that
of some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.

Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces of
different kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movement
observed. Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as the
peasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resultin
from several other forces, like the movement of the wheels; others aain
as an intellectual influence, like the smoke that is blown away.

So lon as histories are written of separate individuals, whether
Caesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories of
all, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quite
impossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conception
of a force compellin men to direct their activity toward a certain end.
And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.

This conception is the one handle by means of which the material of
history, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone who
breaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without findin some other method
of treatin historical material, merely deprives himself of the one
possible way of dealin with it. The necessity of the conception of
power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by the
universal historians and historians of culture themselves, for they
professedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it at
every step.

In dealin with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to now is
like money in circulation--paper money and coin. The bioraphies and
special national histories are like paper money. They can be used and
can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and even
advantaeously, as lon as no one asks what is the security behind them.
You need only foret to ask how the will of heroes produces events, and
such histories as Thiers' will be interestin and instructive and may
perhaps even possess a tine of poetry. But just as doubts of the real
value of paper money arise either because, bein easy to make, too much
of it ets made or because people try to exchane it for old, so also
doubts concernin the real value of such histories arise either because
too many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart
someone inquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?--that is, wants to
exchane the current paper money for the real old of actual
comprehension.

The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture are
like people who, reconizin the defects of paper money, decide to
substitute for it money made of metal that has not the specific ravity
of old. It may indeed make jinlin coin, but will do no more than
that. Paper money may deceive the inorant, but nobody is deceived by
tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jinle. As old is
old only if it is serviceable not merely for exchane but also for use,
so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply to
history's essential question: what is power? The universal historians
ive contradictory replies to that question, while the historians of
culture evade it and answer somethin quite different. And as counters
of imitation old can be used only amon a roup of people who aree to
accept them as old, or amon those who do not know the nature of old,
so universal historians and historians of culture, not answerin
humanity's essential question, serve as currency for some purposes of
their own, only in universities and amon the mass of readers who have a
taste for what they call "serious readin."




CHAPTER IV

Havin abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divine
subjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjection
of that man's will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictions
take a sinle step till it has chosen one of two thins: either a return
to the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in human
affairs or a definite explanation of the meanin of the force producin
historical events and termed "power."

A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; and
so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.

Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and o to war. We are so
accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:
why did six hundred thousand men o to fiht when Napoleon uttered
certain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power and so what he
ordered was done.

This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was iven
him by od. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential to
determine what is this power of one man over others.

It cannot be the direct physical power of a stron man over a weak one--
a domination based on the application or threat of physical force, like
the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral force,
as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leadin
fiures in history are heroes, that is, men ifted with a special
strenth of soul and mind called enius. This power cannot be based on
the predominance of moral strenth, for, not to mention heroes such as
Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely, history
shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich, who ruled over
millions of people, had any particular moral qualities, but on the
contrary were enerally morally weaker than any of the millions they
ruled over.

If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moral
qualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked for
elsewhere--in the relation to the people of the man who wields the
power.

And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,
that exchane bank of history which offers to exchane history's
understandin of power for true old.

Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressed or
tacit consent, to their chosen rulers.

In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how a
state and power miht be arraned were it possible for all that to be
arraned, it is all very clear; but when applied to history that
definition of power needs explanation.

The science of jurisprudence reards the state and power as the ancients
rearded fire--namely, as somethin existin absolutely. But for
history, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modern
physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.

From this fundamental difference between the view held by history and
that held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tell
minutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and what power--
existin immutably outside time--is, but to history's questions about
the meanin of the mutations of power in time it can answer nothin.

If power be the collective will of the people transferred to their
ruler, was Puachev a representative of the will of the people? If not,
then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he was
taken prisoner at Boulone, and why, later on, were those criminals whom
he arrested?

Do palace revolutions--in which sometimes only two or three people take
part--transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In international
relations, is the will of the people also transferred to their
conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred to
Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred to
Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went to
fiht the Austrians?

To these questions three answers are possible:

Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is always
unconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, and
that therefore every emerence of a new power, every strule aainst
the power once appointed, should be absolutely rearded as an
infrinement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people is
transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and known
conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and even
destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of the
conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) that
the will of the people is deleated to the rulers conditionally, but
that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearance
of several authorities, their strules and their falls, result solely
from the reater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknown
conditions on which the will of the people is transferred from some
people to others.

And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain the
relation of the people to their rulers.

Some historians--those bioraphical and specialist historians already
referred to--in their simplicity failin to understand the question of
the meanin of power, seem to consider that the collective will of the
people is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, and
therefore when describin some sinle state they assume that particular
power to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other force
opposin this is not a power but a violation of power--mere violence.

Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,
has the inconvenience--in application to complex and stormy periods in
the life of nations durin which various powers arise simultaneously and
strule with one another--that a Leitimist historian will prove that
the National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mere
infriners of the true power, while a Republican and a Bonapartist will
prove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was the
real power, and that all the others were violations of power. Evidently
the explanations furnished by these historians bein mutually
contradictory can only satisfy youn children.

Reconizin the falsity of this view of history, another set of
historians say that power rests on a conditional deleation of the will
of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have power
only conditionally on carryin out the proram that the will of the
people has by tacit areement prescribed to them. But what this proram
consists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continually
contradict one another.

Each historian, accordin to his view of what constitutes a nation's
proress, looks for these conditions in the reatness, wealth, freedom,
or enlihtenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not to
mention the historians' contradictions as to the nature of this proram-
-or even admittin that some one eneral proram of these conditions
exists--the facts of history almost always contradict that theory. If
the conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the wealth,
freedom, and enlihtenment of the people, how is it that Louis XIV and
Ivan the Terrible end their reins tranquilly, while Louis XVI and
Charles I are executed by their people? To this question historians
reply that Louis XIV's activity, contrary to the proram, reacted on
Louis XVI. But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV--why
should it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for such
reactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers. Equally
little does this view explain why for several centuries the collective
will is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and then
suddenly durin a period of fifty years is transferred to the
Convention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,
to Napoleon aain, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican
overnment, and to Napoleon III. When explainin these rapid transfers
of the people's will from one individual to another, especially in view
of international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians are
oblied to admit that some of these transfers are not normal deleations
of the people's will but are accidents dependent on cunnin, on
mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or a
party leader. So that the reater part of the events of history--civil
wars, revolutions, and conquests--are presented by these historians not
as the results of free transferences of the people's will, but as
results of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,
once aain, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also see
and admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory.

These historians resemble a botanist who, havin noticed that some
plants row from seeds producin two cotyledons, should insist that all
that rows does so by sproutin into two leaves, and that the palm, the
mushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full rowth and no loner
resemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.

Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people is
transferred to historic personaes conditionally, but that the
conditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personaes have
power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been
deleated to them.

But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in the
historic leaders but in the nations themselves, what sinificance have
those leaders?

The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:
the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.

But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the
leaders serves as an expression of the people's will or only some part
of it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of
the people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the details of
the court scandals contained in the bioraphies of a Napoleon or a
Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evident
nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an
historical leader which serves to express the people's life, as other
so-called "philosophical" historians believe, then to determine which
side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation's life, we have
first of all to know in what the nation's life consists.

Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most
obscure, impalpable, and eneral abstraction which can cover all
conceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim of
humanity's movement. The most usual eneralizations adopted by almost
all the historians are: freedom, equality, enlihtenment, proress,
civilization, and culture. Postulatin some eneralization as the oal
of the movement of humanity, the historians study the men of whom the
reatest number of monuments have remained: kins, ministers, enerals,
authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, to the extent to which in
their opinion these persons have promoted or hindered that abstraction.
But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist in
freedom, equality, enlihtenment, or civilization, and as the connection
of the people with the rulers and enlihteners of humanity is only based
on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is
always transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that the
activity of the millions who mirate, burn houses, abandon ariculture,
and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the
activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practice
ariculture, or slay their fellow creatures.

History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoples of the
west at the end of the eihteenth century and their drive eastward
explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistresses
and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,
Beaumarchais, and others?

Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan and Siberia
expressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan the Terrible and by
his correspondence with Kurbski?

Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explained by
the life and activity of the odfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?
For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without leaders,
with a crowd of varants, and with Peter the Hermit, remains
incomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of that
movement when a rational and sacred aim for the Crusade--the deliverance
of Jerusalem--had been clearly defined by historic leaders. Popes,
kins, and knihts incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but the
people did not o, for the unknown cause which had previously impelled
them to o no loner existed. The history of the odfreys and the
Minnesiners can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And the
history of the odfreys and the Minnesiners has remained the history of
odfreys and Minnesiners, but the history of the life of the peoples
and their impulses has remained unknown.

Still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to us the
life of the peoples.

The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions of
life and thouht of a writer or a reformer. We learn that Luther had a
hot temper and said such and such thins; we learn that Rousseau was
suspicious and wrote such and such books; but we do not learn why after
the Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor why durin the
French Revolution they uillotined one another.

If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newest
historians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but not
the history of the life of the peoples.




CHAPTER V

The life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men, for
the connection between those men and the nations has not been found. The
theory that this connection is based on the transference of the
collective will of a people to certain historical personaes is an
hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.

The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people to
historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence
and be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, as
soon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur--that is, as soon as
history beins--that theory explains nothin.

The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the
people's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.

Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, the
theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because
the collective will was transferred to him.

The replies this theory ives to historical questions are like the
replies of a man who, watchin the movements of a herd of cattle and
payin no attention to the varyin quality of the pasturae in different
parts of the field, or to the drivin of the herdsman, should attribute
the direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head.

"The herd oes in that direction because the animal in front leads it
and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that
leader." This is what historians of the first class say--those who
assume the unconditional transference of the people's will.

"If the animals leadin the herd chane, this happens because the
collective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader to
another, accordin to whether the animal is or is not leadin them in
the direction selected by the whole herd." Such is the reply historians
who assume that the collective will of the people is deleated to rulers
under conditions which they reard as known. (With this method of
observation it often happens that the observer, influenced by the
direction he himself prefers, reards those as leaders who, owin to the
people's chane of direction, are no loner in front, but on one side,
or even in the rear.)

"If the animals in front are continually chanin and the direction of
the whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to follow
a iven direction the animals transfer their will to the animals that
have attracted our attention, and to study the movements of the herd we
must watch the movements of all the prominent animals movin on all
sides of the herd." So say the third class of historians who reard all
historical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression of
their ae.

The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historic
persons is merely a paraphrase--a restatement of the question in other
words.

What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is the
collective will of the people transferred to one person. Under what
condition is the will of the people deleated to one person? On
condition that that person expresses the will of the whole people. That
is, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meanin of which
we do not understand.

If the realm of human knowlede were confined to abstract reasonin,
then havin subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" that
juridical science ives us, humanity would conclude that power is merely
a word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomena man has,
besides abstract reasonin, experience by which he verifies his
reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word but
an actually existin phenomenon.

Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activity
of men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power is
proved both by history and by observin contemporary events.

Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will the
event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and the
French o to Mexico. The Kin of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees and
an army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree and an army enters
Russia. Alexander I ives a command and the French submit to the
Bourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is always
related to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.

The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledin divine
intervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in the
expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but that
supposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.

On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man's will--
his words--are only part of the eneral activity expressed in an event,
as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so without assumin an
incomprehensible, supernatural force--a miracle--one cannot admit that
words can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of men. On
the other hand, even if we admitted that words could be the cause of
events, history shows that the expression of the will of historical
personaes does not in most cases produce any effect, that is to say,
their commands are often not executed, and sometimes the very opposite
of what they order occurs.

Without admittin divine intervention in the affairs of humanity we
cannot reard "power" as the cause of events.

Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation that
exists between the expression of someone's will and the execution of
that will by others.

To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish a
conception of the expression of will, referrin it to man and not to the
Deity.

If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancient history
tells us, the expression of that will is independent of time and is not
caused by anythin, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event. But
speakin of commands that are the expression of the will of men actin
in time and in relation to one another, to explain the connection of
commands with events we must restore: (1) the condition of all that
takes place: the continuity of movement in time both of the events and
of the person who commands, and (2) the inevitability of the connection
between the person commandin and those who execute his command.




CHAPTER VI

Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, can
relate to a whole series of events occurrin over a period of years or
centuries, and only the Deity, independent of everythin, can by His
sole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; but man acts
in time and himself takes part in what occurs.

Reinstatin the first condition omitted, that of time, we see that no
command can be executed without some precedin order havin been iven
renderin the execution of the last command possible.

No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a whole series
of occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refers
to a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event.

When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to o to war, we
combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive
commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded an
invasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordered such and such
papers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and to Petersbur; tomorrow
such and such decrees and orders to the army, the fleet, the
commissariat, and so on and so on--millions of commands, which formed a
whole series correspondin to a series of events which brouht the
French armies into Russia.

If throuhout his rein Napoleon ave commands concernin an invasion of
Enland and expended on no other undertakin so much time and effort,
and yet durin his whole rein never once attempted to execute that
desin but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country he
considered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedly
expressed)--this came about because his commands did not correspond to
the course of events in the first case, but did so correspond in the
latter.

For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a man should
order what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot be
executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon's invasion of
Russia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,
for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its
execution. Every order executed is always one of an immense number
unexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of
events remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones et linked up with a
consecutive series of commands correspondin to a series of events, and
are executed.

Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes
it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of
thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that
event have been executed, we foret about the others that were not
executed because they could not be. Apart from that, the chief source of
our error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historical
accounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, and petty events, such
for instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia, is
eneralized into one event in accord with the result produced by that
series of events, and correspondin with this eneralization the whole
series of commands is also eneralized into a sinle expression of will.

We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In reality
in all Napoleon's activity we never find anythin resemblin an
expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions of
his will, very variously and indefinitely directed. Amid a lon series
of unexecuted orders of Napoleon's one series, for the campain of 1812,
was carried out--not because those orders differed in any way from the
other, unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course of
events that led the French army into Russia; just as in stencil work
this or that fiure comes out not because the color was laid on from
this side or in that way, but because it was laid on from all sides over
the fiure cut in the stencil.

So that examinin the relation in time of the commands to the events, we
find that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that a
certain definite dependence exists between the two.

To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to
reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceedin not from
the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who ives the command
himself takes part in the event.

This relation of the commander to those he commands is just what is
called power. This relation consists in the followin:

For common action people always unite in certain combinations, in which
reardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action, the
relation between those takin part in it is always the same.

Men unitin in these combinations always assume such relations toward
one another that the larer number take a more direct share, and the
smaller number a less direct share, in the collective action for which
they have combined.

Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one of
the most strikin and definite examples is an army.

Every army is composed of lower rades of the service--the rank and
file--of whom there are always the reatest number; of the next hiher
military rank--corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there are
fewer, and of still-hiher officers of whom there are still fewer, and
so on to the hihest military command which is concentrated in one
person.

A military oranization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, of
which the base with the larest diameter consists of the rank and file;
the next hiher and smaller section of the cone consists of the next
hiher rades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of which
will represent the commander-in-chief.

The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower section of the
cone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbin, hackin,
burnin, and pillain, and always receives orders for these actions
from men above him; he himself never ives an order. The noncommissioned
officers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself less
frequently than the soldiers, but they already ive commands. An officer
still less often acts directly himself, but commands still more
frequently. A eneral does nothin but command the troops, indicates the
objective, and hardly ever uses a weapon himself. The commander-in-chief
never takes direct part in the action itself, but only ives eneral
orders concernin the movement of the mass of the troops. A similar
relation of people to one another is seen in every combination of men
for common activity--in ariculture, trade, and every administration.

And so without particularly analyzin all the contiuous sections of a
cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in any
administrative or public business whatever from the lowest to the
hihest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combine
in such relations that the more directly they participate in performin
the action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,
while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the more
they command and the fewer of them there are; risin in this way from
the lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct share
in the action and directs his activity chiefly to commandin.

This relation of the men who command to those they command is what
constitutes the essence of the conception called power.

Havin restored the condition of time under which all events occur, we
find that a command is executed only when it is related to a
correspondin series of events. Restorin the essential condition of
relation between those who command and those who execute, we find that
by the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest part
in the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed to
commandin.




CHAPTER VII

When an event is takin place people express their opinions and wishes
about it, and as the event results from the collective activity of many
people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to be
fulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinions expressed is
fulfilled, that opinion ets connected with the event as a command
precedin it.

Men are haulin a lo. Each of them expresses his opinion as to how and
where to haul it. They haul the lo away, and it happens that this is
done as one of them said. He ordered it. There we have command and power
in their primary form. The man who worked most with his hands could not
think so much about what he was doin, or reflect on or command what
would result from the common activity; while the man who commanded more
would evidently work less with his hands on account of his reater
verbal activity.

When some larer concourse of men direct their activity to a common aim
there is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity is
iven to directin and commandin, take less part in the direct work.

When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections which
as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his present
activity, and uide him in plannin his future actions. Just the same is
done by a concourse of people, allowin those who do not take a direct
part in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, and
surmises concernin their collective activity.

For reasons known or unknown to us the French bean to drown and kill
one another. And correspondin to the event its justification appears in
people's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France, for
liberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill one another, and this
event was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for a
centralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on. Men went from
the west to the east killin their fellow men, and the event was
accompanied by phrases about the lory of France, the baseness of
Enland, and so on. History shows us that these justifications of the
events have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case of
killin a man as the result of reconizin his rihts, and the killin
of millions in Russia for the humiliation of Enland. But these
justifications have a very necessary sinificance in their own day.

These justifications release those who produce the events from moral
responsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in front
of a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: they clear
men's moral responsibilities from their path.

Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplest
question that presents itself when examinin each historical event. How
is it that millions of men commit collective crimes--make war, commit
murder, and so on?

With the present complex forms of political and social life in Europe
can any event that is not prescribed, decreed, or ordered by monarchs,
ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imained? Is there any
collective action which cannot find its justification in political
unity, in patriotism, in the balance of power, or in civilization? So
that every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressed
wish and, receivin a justification, presents itself as the result of
the will of one man or of several men.

In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cuts will
always be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the ship the
movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.

Only by watchin closely moment by moment the movement of that flow and
comparin it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves that
every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship, and
that we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves were
imperceptibly movin.

We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historical
characters (that is, re-establish the inevitable condition of all that
occurs--the continuity of movement in time) and do not lose siht of the
essential connection of historical persons with the masses.

When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same wave
ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turns
frequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be the wave
anticipatin its movement.

Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen and
decreed. Wherever the ship may o, the rush of water which neither
directs nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distance
seems to us not merely to move of itself but to overn the ship's
movement also.

Examinin only those expressions of the will of historical persons
which, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumed that
the events depended on those commands. But examinin the events
themselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood to
the people, we have found that they and their orders were dependent on
events. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however many
commands were issued, the event does not take place unless there are
other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs--be it what it may--
then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different people
some will always be found which by their meanin and their time of
utterance are related as commands to the events.

Arrivin at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively to
these two essential questions of history:

(1) What is power?

(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?

(1) Power is the relation of a iven person to other individuals, in
which the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, and
justifications of the collective action that is performed, the less is
his participation in that action.

(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectual
activity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians have
supposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in the
events, and who always combine in such a way that those takin the
larest direct share in the event take on themselves the least
responsibility and vice versa.

Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event; physically it
is those who submit to the power. But as the moral activity is
inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither in
the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.

Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the
phenomena we are examinin.

In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity--that final limit
to which in every domain of thouht man's reason arrives if it is not
playin with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heat produces
electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.

Speakin of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, we
cannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it is
inconceivable otherwise, because it must be so and that it is a law. The
same applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur we do
not know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,
people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, and
we say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in other
words that it is a law.




CHAPTER VIII

If history dealt only with external phenomena, the establishment of this
simple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished our
arument. But the law of history relates to man. A particle of matter
cannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsion
and that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,
says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.

The presence of the problem of man's free will, thouh unexpressed, is
felt at every step of history.

All seriously thinkin historians have involuntarily encountered this
question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and the
false path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack of
a solution of that question.

If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could act as he
pleased, all history would be a series of disconnected incidents.

If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely, that
is, as he chose, it is evident that one sinle free act of that man's in
violation of the laws overnin human action would destroy the
possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity.

If there be a sinle law overnin the actions of men, free will cannot
exist, for then man's will is subject to that law.

In this contradiction lies the problem of free will, which from most
ancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancient
times has been presented in its whole tremendous sinificance.

The problem is that reardin man as a subject of observation from
whatever point of view--theoloical, historical, ethical, or
philosophic--we find a eneral law of necessity to which he (like all
that exists) is subject. But reardin him from within ourselves as what
we are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.

This consciousness is a source of self-conition quite apart from and
independent of reason. Throuh his reason man observes himself, but only
throuh consciousness does he know himself.

Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reason
is conceivable.

To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all be
conscious of himself as livin. A man is only conscious of himself as a
livin bein by the fact that he wills, that is, is conscious of his
volition. But his will--which forms the essence of his life--man
reconizes (and can but reconize) as free.

If, observin himself, man sees that his will is always directed by one
and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of takin food,
usin his brain, or anythin else) he cannot reconize this never-
varyin direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of it. Were
it not free it could not be limited. A man's will seems to him to be
limited just because he is not conscious of it except as free.

You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.
Everyone understands that this illoical reply is an irrefutable
demonstration of freedom.

That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject to
reason.

If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independent
source of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasonin and to
experience, but in fact such subjection does not exist and is
inconceivable.

A series of experiments and aruments proves to every man that he, as an
object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits to
them and never resists the laws of ravity or impermeability once he has
become acquainted with them. But the same series of experiments and
aruments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he is
conscious in himself is impossible, and that his every action depends on
his oranization, his character, and the motives actin upon him; yet
man never submits to the deductions of these experiments and aruments.
Havin learned from experiment and arument that a stone falls
downwards, a man indubitably believes this and always expects the law
that he has learned to be fulfilled.

But learnin just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he does
not and cannot believe this.

However often experiment and reasonin may show a man that under the
same conditions and with the same character he will do the same thin as
before, yet when under the same conditions and with the same character
he approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in the
same way, he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment that
he can act as he pleases. Every man, savae or sae, however
incontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it is
impossible to imaine two different courses of action in precisely the
same conditions, feels that without this irrational conception (which
constitutes the essence of freedom) he cannot imaine life. He feels
that however impossible it may be, it is so, for without this conception
of freedom not only would he be unable to understand life, but he would
be unable to live for a sinle moment.

He could not live, because all man's efforts, all his impulses to life,
are only efforts to increase freedom. Wealth and poverty, fame and
obscurity, power and subordination, strenth and weakness, health and
disease, culture and inorance, work and leisure, repletion and huner,
virtue and vice, are only reater or lesser derees of freedom.

A man havin no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived of
life.

If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senseless
contradiction like the possibility of performin two actions at one and
the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that only
proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.

This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled by
experiment or arument, reconized by all thinkers and felt by everyone
without exception, this consciousness without which no conception of man
is possible constitutes the other side of the question.

Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-ood, and all-seein od.
What is sin, the conception of which arises from the consciousness of
man's freedom? That is a question for theoloy.

The actions of men are subject to eneral immutable laws expressed in
statistics. What is man's responsibility to society, the conception of
which results from the conception of freedom? That is a question for
jurisprudence.

Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives actin
upon him. What is conscience and the perception of riht and wron in
actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is a
question for ethics.

Man in connection with the eneral life of humanity appears subject to
laws which determine that life. But the same man apart from that
connection appears to be free. How should the past life of nations and
of humanity be rearded--as the result of the free, or as the result of
the constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.

Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowlede--
thanks to that most powerful enine of inorance, the diffusion of
printed matter--has the question of the freedom of will been put on a
level on which the question itself cannot exist. In our time the
majority of so-called advanced people--that is, the crowd of
inoramuses--have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with one
side of the question for a solution of the whole problem.

They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist, for
the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscular
movements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul and
free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we spran
from the apes. They say this, not at all suspectin that thousands of
years ao that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now
tryin to prove by physioloy and comparative zooloy was not merely
acknowleded by all the reliions and all the thinkers, but has never
been denied. They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in
this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination of
one side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view of
observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
that man followin the eneral law may have developed from lower animals
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side the
truth admitted thousands of years ao by all the reliious and
philosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man is
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair's
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,
based on the consciousness of freedom.

If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is as
comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the
time, in the second case it is the oriin); and the question of how
man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative
physioloy and zooloy, for in a fro, a rabbit, or an ape, we can
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.

The naturalists and their followers, thinkin they can solve this
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of a
church who, availin themselves of the absence of the chief
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be
delihted that from their point of view as plasterers, everythin is now
so smooth and reular.




CHAPTER IX

For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, history
has this advantae over other branches of knowlede in which the
question is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer to
the essence of man's free will but its manifestation in the past and
under certain conditions.

In reard to this question, history stands to the other sciences as
experimental science stands to abstract science.

The subject for history is not man's will itself but our presentation of
it.

And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by the
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
for theoloy, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation of
man's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
taken place.

In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, althouh
each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.

To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and what
constitutes the essence of these two conceptions, the philosophy of
history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
sciences. Instead of first definin the conceptions of freedom and
inevitability in themselves, and then ranin the phenomena of life
under those definitions, history should deduce a definition of the
conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense
quantity of phenomena of which it is conizant and that always appear
dependent on these two elements.

Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we
may consider, we always reard it as the result partly of man's free
will and partly of the law of inevitability.

Whether we speak of the miration of the peoples and the incursions of
the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's
action an hour ao in choosin one direction out of several for his
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The deree of freedom and
inevitability overnin the actions of these people is clearly defined
for us.

Our conception of the deree of freedom often varies accordin to
differences in the point of view from which we reard the event, but
every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of
freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the more
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
the more inevitability the less freedom.

The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases
accordin to the point of view from which the action is rearded, but
their relation is always one of inverse proportion.

A sinkin man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hunry mother
exhausted by feedin her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained to
discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless man--
seem less uilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law of
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
placed, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself
drownin, that the mother was hunry, that the soldier was in the ranks,
and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ao and
has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less uilty
and his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone who
considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who
examined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way every
action of an insane, intoxicated, or hihly excited man appears less
free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him
who committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to one
who does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom is
increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
correspondinly decreased or increased, accordin to the point of view
from which the action is rearded. So that the reater the conception of
necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.

Reliion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence, and
history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
freedom.

All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and
necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:

(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.

(2) His relation to time.

(3) His relation to the causes leadin to the action.

The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man's
relation to the external world and the reater or lesser clearness of
our understandin of the definite position occupied by the man in
relation to everythin coexistin with him. This is what makes it
evident that a drownin man is less free and more subject to necessity
than one standin on dry round, and that makes the actions of a man
closely connected with others in a thickly populated district, or of one
bound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less free
and more subject to necessity than those of a man livin in solitude and
seclusion.

If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everythin around
him, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see his relation to
anythin around him, if we see his connection with anythin whatever--
with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on which he is
enaed, even with the air he breathes or the liht that falls on the
thins about him--we see that each of these circumstances has an
influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity. And
the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of his
freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that
weihs on him increases.

The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
the man's action occupies in time. That is the round which makes the
fall of the first man, resultin in the production of the human race,
appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriae today. It is
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ao
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.

The deree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this
respect on the reater or lesser lapse of time between the performance
of the action and our judment of it.

If I examine an act I performed a moment ao in approximately the same
circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedly
free. But if I examine an act performed a month ao, then bein in
different circumstances, I cannot help reconizin that if that act had
not been committed much that resulted from it--ood, areeable, and even
essential--would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action still
more remote, ten years ao or more, then the consequences of my action
are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imaine what would have
happened had that action not been performed. The farther I o back in
memory, or what is the same thin the farther I o forward in my
judment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
action.

In history we find a very similar proress of conviction concernin the
part played by free will in the eneral affairs of humanity. A
contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doin of all the
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
inevitable results which prevent our considerin anythin else possible.
And the farther we o back in examinin events the less arbitrary do
they appear.

The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem to
us, thouh already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'
will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupyin its definite
place in history and without which we cannot imaine the modern history
of Europe, thouh to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared
as merely due to the will of certain people. In reard to the miration
of the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that the
renovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice. The
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and
the more manifest the law of inevitability.

The third consideration is the deree to which we apprehend that endless
chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have its
definite place as a result of what has one before and as a cause of
what will follow.

The better we are acquainted with the physioloical, psycholoical, and
historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,
and the more correctly we perceive the physioloical, psycholoical, and
historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
observin and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
actions and those of others appear.

When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a
crime, a ood action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
reater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urently
demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act we
rate its merit most hihly. In an indifferent case we reconize in it
more individuality, oriinality, and independence. But if even one of
the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we reconize a certain
element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,
or the acknowledment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
of the apparently oriinal action. That a criminal was reared amon male
factors mitiates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
comprehensible than ratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
deservin of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a
sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or by
what the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a lare rane of
examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seekin the
correlation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions
appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we
connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions and
had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of
their inevitability would be still reater. The dishonest conduct of the
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen into
bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.
If the man whose actions we are considerin is on a very low stae of
mental development, like a child, a madman, or a simpleton--then,
knowin the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and
intellience in question, we see so lare an element of necessity and so
little free will that as soon as we know the cause promptin the action
we can foretell the result.

On these three considerations alone is based the conception of
irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuatin circumstances admitted
by all leislative codes. The responsibility appears reater or less
accordin to our reater or lesser knowlede of the circumstances in
which the man was placed whose action is bein juded, and accordin to
the reater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the
action and its investiation, and accordin to the reater or lesser
understandin of the causes that led to the action.




CHAPTER X

Thus our conception of free will and inevitability radually diminishes
or increases accordin to the reater or lesser connection with the
external world, the reater or lesser remoteness of time, and the
reater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
contemplate a man's life.

So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the
external world is well known, where the time between the action and its
examination is reat, and where the causes of the action are most
accessible, we et the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a
minimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on external
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
whose action are beyond our ken, we et the conception of a minimum of
inevitability and a maximum of freedom.

In neither case--however we may chane our point of view, however plain
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external
world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however lon or short the
period of time, however intelliible or incomprehensible the causes of
the action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
complete necessity.

(1) To whatever deree we may imaine a man to be exempt from the
influence of the external world, we never et a conception of freedom in
space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds
him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seems
to me free; but askin myself whether I could raise my arm in every
direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
least obstruction to that action either from thins around me or from
the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible
directions because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action to
be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. To
conceive of a man bein free we must imaine him outside space, which is
evidently impossible.

(2) However much we approximate the time of judment to the time of the
deed, we never et a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine an
action committed a second ao I must still reconize it as not bein
free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
abstained from liftin my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am not
now abstainin from doin so at the first moment when I asked the
question. Time has one by which I could not detain, the arm I then
lifted is no loner the same as the arm I now refrain from liftin, nor
is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. The
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made
would be the only one. That I did not lift my arm a moment later does
not prove that I could have abstained from liftin it then. And since I
could make only one movement at that sinle moment of time, it could not
have been any other. To imaine it as free, it is necessary to imaine
it in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--that
is, outside time, which is impossible.

(3) However much the difficulty of understandin the causes may be
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is, an
absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
expression of will in any action, our own or another's, the first demand
of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a
cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an action
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
cause is the cause of my action.

But even if--imainin a man quite exempt from all influences, examinin
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete
freedom in man, for a bein uninfluenced by the external world, standin
outside of time and independent of cause, is no loner a man.

In the same way we can never imaine the action of a man quite devoid of
freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.

(1) However we may increase our knowlede of the conditions of space in
which man is situated, that knowlede can never be complete, for the
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. And
therefore so lon as not all the conditions influencin men are defined,
there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
remains.

(2) However we may prolon the period of time between the action we are
examinin and the judment upon it, that period will be finite, while
time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute
inevitability.

(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, we
shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so aain we
never reach absolute inevitability.

But besides this, even if, admittin the remainin minimum of freedom to
equal zero, we assumed in some iven case--as for instance in that of a
dyin man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, by
so doin we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
examinin, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And
so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as
the conception of a man's completely free action.

And so to imaine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowlede of an
infinite number of space relations, an infinitely lon period of time,
and an infinite series of causes.

To imaine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of
inevitability, we must imaine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,
and free from dependence on cause.

In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom we
should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.

In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
cause, which by the fact of its bein unconditioned and unlimited would
be nothin, or mere content without form.

We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man's
whole outlook on the universe is constructed--the incomprehensible
essence of life, and the laws definin that essence.

Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that ive it
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imained otherwise. (2) Time is
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.
(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beinnin and can
have no end.

Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,
consequently I include space. (2) I measure flowin time by the fixed
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as livin,
consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myself
to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.

Reason ives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousness
ives expression to the essence of freedom.

Freedom not limited by anythin is the essence of life, in man's
consciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in its
three forms.

Freedom is the thin examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom
is the content. Inevitability is the form.

Only by separatin the two sources of conition, related to one another
as form to content, do we et the mutually exclusive and separately
incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.

Only by unitin them do we et a clear conception of man's life.

Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one
another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.

All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.

All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain
relation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence of
life to the laws of reason.

The reat natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of
them; we call those forces ravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
we call that freedom.

But just as the force of ravitation, incomprehensible in itself but
felt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which we
know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the first
knowlede that all bodies have weiht, up to Newton's law), so too the
force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is
conscious, is intelliible to us only in as far as we know the laws of
inevitability to which it is subject (from the fact that every man dies,
up to the knowlede of the most complex economic and historic laws).

All knowlede is merely a brinin of this essence of life under the
laws of reason.

Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from any
other force. The forces of ravitation, electricity, or chemical
affinity are only distinuished from one another in that they are
differently defined by reason. Just so the force of man's free will is
distinuished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the
definition reason ives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
ravitation, or heat, or the force that makes thins row; for reason,
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.

And as the undefinable essence of the force movin the heavenly bodies,
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or of
chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zooloy, and so on, just in the
same way does the force of free will form the content of history. But
just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
in human beins in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms the
subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
metaphysics.

In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force is
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know
of the essence of life.

So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,
what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only an
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
human life.




CHAPTER XI

History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connection
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.

The reconition of man's free will as somethin capable of influencin
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for
history as the reconition of a free force movin the heavenly bodies
would be for astronomy.

That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,
that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a sinle body movin
freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are neatived and no
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any loner exists. If
any sinle action is due to free will, then not a sinle historical law
can exist, nor any conception of historical events.

For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end of
which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
consciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, and
dependence on cause.

The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the more
evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those laws
is the problem of history.

From the standpoint from which the science of history now reards its
subject on the path it now follows, seekin the causes of events in
man's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,
for however man's free will may be restricted, as soon as we reconize
it as a force not subject to law, the existence of law becomes
impossible.

Only by reducin this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that
is, by reardin it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
instead of seekin causes, history will take the discovery of laws as
its problem.

The search for these laws has lon been beun and the new methods of
thouht which history must adopt are bein worked out simultaneously
with the self-destruction toward which--ever dissectin and dissectin
the causes of phenomena--the old method of history is movin.

All human sciences have traveled alon that path. Arrivin at
infinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons the
process of analysis and enters on the new process of the interation of
unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandonin the conception of
cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to all
unknown, infinitely small, elements.

In another form but alon the same path of reflection the other sciences
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of ravity he did not say
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
bodies from the larest to the smallest have the property of attractin
one another, that is, leavin aside the question of the cause of the
movement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodies
from the infinitely lare to the infinitely small. The same is done by
the natural sciences: leavin aside the question of cause, they seek for
laws. History stands on the same path. And if history has for its object
the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the
narration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, settin aside
the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the
inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.




CHAPTER XII

From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere
reconition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmoraphy of the ancients. By disprovin
that law it miht have been possible to retain the old conception of the
movements of the bodies, but without disprovin it, it would seem
impossible to continue studyin the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after the
discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still
studied for a lon time.

From the time the first person said and proved that the number of births
or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that mode
of overnment is determined by certain eoraphical and economic
conditions, and that certain relations of population to soil produce
mirations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been built
were destroyed in their essence.

By refutin these new laws the former view of history miht have been
retained; but without refutin them it would seem impossible to continue
studyin historic events as the results of man's free will. For if a
certain mode of overnment was established or certain mirations of
peoples took place in consequence of such and such eoraphic,
ethnoraphic, or economic conditions, then the free will of those
individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of overnment
or occasioned the mirations can no loner be rearded as the cause.

And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the
laws of statistics, eoraphy, political economy, comparative philoloy,
and eoloy, which directly contradict its assumptions.

The strule between the old views and the new was lon and stubbornly
fouht out in physical philosophy. Theoloy stood on uard for the old
views and accused the new of violatin revelation. But when truth
conquered, theoloy established itself just as firmly on the new
foundation.

Just as proloned and stubborn is the strule now proceedin between
the old and the new conception of history, and theoloy in the same way
stands on uard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subvertin
revelation.

In the one case as in the other, on both sides the strule provokes
passion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and reret for
the loss of the whole edifice constructed throuh the aes, on the other
is the passion for destruction.

To the men who fouht aainst the risin truths of physical philosophy,
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
od, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, to
Voltaire for example, it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyed
reliion, and he utilized the law of ravitation as a weapon aainst
reliion.

Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of ood and evil,
and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up on
those conceptions.

So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law of
inevitability today use that law as a weapon aainst reliion, thouh
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
astronomy, far from destroyin, even strenthens the foundation on which
the institutions of state and church are erected.

As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history now,
the whole difference of opinion is based on the reconition or
nonreconition of somethin absolute, servin as the measure of visible
phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
it is the independence of personality--free will.

As with astronomy the difficulty of reconizin the motion of the earth
lay in abandonin the immediate sensation of the earth's fixity and of
the motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of reconizin
the subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause lies
in renouncin the direct feelin of the independence of one's own
personality. But as in astronomy the new view said: "It is true that we
do not feel the movement of the earth, but by admittin its immobility
we arrive at absurdity, while by admittin its motion (which we do not
feel) we arrive at laws," so also in history the new view says: "It is
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admittin our
free will we arrive at absurdity, while by admittin our dependence on
the external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."

In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an
unreal immobility in space and to reconize a motion we did not feel; in
the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom that
does not exist, and to reconize a dependence of which we are not
conscious.